+++
date = '2019-10-07T00:00:00+00:00'
title = 'Laborem Exercens'
description = 'Papal Encyclicals, Trade Unionism and the Ethics of Employment.'
+++

# Papal Encyclicals, Trade Unionism and the Ethics of Employment.

Giant inflatable rats are not often to be seen in the streets of Newcastle. However, a few years’ back Scabby the Rat paid the city a visit. I won’t mention his location: US readers will understand why. To some Americans, Scabby is an exemplar of free speech, as supported by First Amendment rights, to others, simply an aggressive form of secondary picketing. A 30-foot inflatable is the US trade union movement’s method of choice to deter strike breaking, or at least highlight those employers with a less then ethical attitude to labour rights. So, if strike breakers are scabs what better deterrence could there be than to confront them with the reality of their activities in the form of an inflatable rat. Their essence is reproduced in the form the of the inflatable as a deterrence, a bit like medieval stone masons putting carved devils on the outside of cathedrals. But what has picketing, and trade union powers got to do with a Pope?

Catholic social teaching, in so far as it is given any thought at all in public consciousness, comes with the negative connotations of teaching on human sexuality: witness the reaction to the principals set out in Humane Vitae, for example. However, possibly to the surprise of non-Catholics (and probably Catholics), Catholic social teaching is not confined to reproductive functions.  But then within the constituent parts of the UK Catholicism has always held a somewhat curious position. It remains the one religion still under a formal restriction, in the sense that it is expressly forbidden under the Act of Union of 1707 for the monarch to be or to marry a Catholic. Its role as the enemy within faded during the nineteenth century, although old animosity has remained in Northern Ireland and occasionally flare up in Scotland.

By a curious irony though it is to the nominally secular state of the USA that the social aspect of religious teachings – both Protestant and Catholic and Jewish, Christian and other faiths – are more readily found as the basis of public discourse. It was that discourse that drew Laborem Exercens to my attention. In some ways, whilst the US remains the home of free market capitalism, the trade union movement there has retained powers lost in the UK since the 1980s. Trade unionism in the US has nothing analogous to Art 11 of the Human Rights Act to rely on to support the freedom of association. Instead, individual states may or may not have statutes permitting rights to join or support unions. Both pro and anti factions in the union debate have called in aid Catholic social teaching - as set out in their encyclicals - to support the right to join or refuse to join a trade union[^1].

An encyclical was originally just a circular letter distributed to bishops and patriarchs. By the eighteenth century, within Catholicism, encyclicals became more defined, as part of the hierarchy of Papal instruction. And in the nineteenth century the encyclical became less confined to theological matters and more engaged with social ethics, even as regards ethics that could be applied to the world at large, rather than reserved to the Catholic faithful. The reason? The Papacy was losing a temporal power it had held for over 1000 years, since Pope Stephen II had persuaded Pepin to grant him power over former Byzantine possessions in Lombardy.    

So, the key to Catholic social teaching is to be found in a mixture of Biblical hermeneutics and the politics of the nineteenth century. It was that century which completed an arc in intellectual history culminating in Nietzsche’s conclusion– God is Dead.[^2] But before the battleground became a purely cerebral one, there was one last gasp of the Papacy’s secular power to overcome.

Late in 1869 the first Council of the Catholic Church since Trent convened in Rome, called by Pius IX. Pius IX had started his Pontificate in 1846 with high expectations for reform, but by 1869 reforming zeal had turned to reaction. Pius IX was responsible for the Syllabus of Errors: a rigid condemnation of the non-Catholic in the religious life, which itself inspired a new spirit of anti-Catholicism in England: Gladstone really went to town in his condemnation.[^3]  

By the summer of 1870 the Council’s theological business was well underway, with a form of words clarifying the doctrine of Papal infallibility agreed by a majority vote – which ultimately lead to a breach with  those who would go on to form the Old Catholics, now part of the Anglican Commune.  The Council broke for a summer recess, but it was never to reconvene. In August that year Napoleon III took the bait in a trap carefully laid by Prussia’s Chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, and declared war. Catholic Austro Hungary remained neutral: Catholic Bavaria abandoned its usual alliance with France and sided with Prussia. Prussia had prepared well. Its generals had learnt the importance of logistics from the recent American Civil War and that railway timetables were as important as élan. Within weeks the last Emperor of the French was a prisoner of the Prussians after their success at Sedan on the 1st September 1870.

South of the Alps the Franco Prussian war to have a fundamental impact on Papal temporal powers. Up until the start of hostilities it was the French who guaranteed that temporal power: a French garrison in Rome held back the forces of the Risorgimento. After Italian reunification Italy was no longer just a geographical expression, but Rome was its capital in name only, protected by the French troops of Napoleon III’s Empire.

With the French back across the Alps the stage was set for Victor Emmanuel II – excommunicated by Pius - to complete Italian re-unification. A force of 50,000 was dispatched to take Rome. The city itself was defended by 13,000 troops of various nationalities, including the Swiss Guard. Pius IX refused to relinquish his temporal powers without a fight and so at 5.00 AM on the morning of 20th September 1870 an artillery barrage commenced. It took three hours of shelling to breach the walls of the city at Porta Pia: the Italian troops poured in led by the Bersaglieri, and soon a white flag was flying over Saint Peter’s. The long history of the Papacy as a temporal power was over. Pius for the second time in his reign contemplated exile. Earlier in the Risorgimento secret overtures had been made to Britain for asylum: after Rome fell, he considered Cologne. In the end Pius was to remain Pope for a further eight years, as a self-proclaimed prisoner of the Vatican, refusing even to have diplomatic relations with the new Kingdom.

Away in Perugia 100 miles to the north of Rome a different priest was waging a different form of struggle. Vincenzo Pecci was the sixth son of Count Ludovico Pecci. Despite, or perhaps because of, his aristocratic background Vincenzo Pecci whilst still theologically conservative, did not hold back at deploying the powers at his disposal to improve the lot of Perugia’s working classes. He formed Monte di Pieta – basically a pawn brokerage, but where the profit was used for the benefit of the borrowers. Prior to Perugia he had been the Papal Nuncio in Belgium, where he honed his skills as a diplomat.

When Pius IX died in 1878 it was Vincenzo Pecci who was elected his successor. He took the name Leo XIII, and it was under his papacy that modern Catholic Social Teaching was born.

The 1870s were a time of change and agitation in Europe. In 1871 the Paris Commune had been a bloody failure – but an inspiration to future revolutionaries. The newly created German Reich was looking for its role in Europe. It had an expanding manufacturing base, creating new competition for Britain and the United States. With its growing economy came inflation, and to stop inflation in 1873 the Reichsmark was linked to the gold standard. This created a run on silver backed currencies – such as the US dollar and the Austrian Thaler. 65% of US rail stocks were held in Europe – and then the US railroads defaulted on bonds worth $790 million.  Not surprisingly, from 1873 onwards Europe and America went into recession. Indeed, until the catastrophe of the 1920s the term “the Great Recession” was used to refer to the years 1873 to 1896. But in a curious parallel to post 2008 economics it wasn’t the rich who suffered: economies kept growing but wages did not. Leo XIII could see the problems of the market economics almost everywhere he looked in Europe.

Capitalism was not, however, completely unrestrained. The same zeal – often religiously motivated - that, in Britain, had led to the abolishing of the slave trade, had turned in the early decades of the nineteenth century to the scandal of child labour, and through the Factory Acts imposed restrictions were imposed on employers to limit the working day. In 1833 a Royal Commission had recommended that no child under the age of nine be permitted to work, and that the working day of children between the ages of 9-11 be limited to a maximum of eight hours: beyond that age the working day went up to 12 hours. Progress was slow: Karl Marx, in the first volume of Das Kapital published in 1867, was to note the findings from the First Report of the Children’s Employment Commission, writing thirty years after the start of the  Commission, still reporting on the degraded state of child workers in Victorian Britain:

> …The manufacture of matches, on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness, has such a bad reputation that only the most miserable part of the working class, half -starved widows and so forth deliver up their children to it, their ‘ragged half-starved untaught children’. Of the witnesses examined… 270 were under the age of 18, fifty under 10, ten only 8, and five only 6 years old. With a working day ranging from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night labour, irregular mealtimes, and meals mostly taken in the work rooms themselves, pestilent with phosphorous, Dante would have found the worst horrors in his Inferno surpassed in this industry.

Whilst employers were scarcely restricted in the contracts they could impose on their workers, by contrast, the rights of workers to organise collectively were heavily circumscribed.

Trade Unions had been criminalised during the Napoleonic Wars by the passing of the Combination Acts. There had been a partial decimalisation in 1824, but It was not until the year after Rome had fallen that Parliament was to pass the   Trade Union Act, 1871. Picketing, however, remained illegal.

Although the 1880s saw no revolution in the industrialised countries of Europe, unrest was growing. In 1887 wage riots in Trafalgar Square had earned the soubriquet of “Bloody Sunday”. In Rome, although still a “prisoner of the Vatican” Leo XIII was not idle. Just like the Danes had done after their catastrophic defeat in the Second Schleswig Holstein War, instead of territorial ambitions the Vatican turned to social issues. Against the tide of rampant capitalism and social deprivation Leo XIII issued the 37th encyclical of his pontificate in the year 1891: Rerum Novarum.

The encyclical might have been Leo’s 37th but it was the first from any Pope to deal with social rather than theological issues and can be viewed as the foundation document for Catholic social teaching. Its subtitle was “On the Condition of Labour” which gives a better idea of its purpose than translating “Rerum Novarum” as “On Revolutionary change”– if only because as the opening paragraph makes clear Leo XII was proposing social justice to avoiding class conflict: -

“That the spirit of revolutionary change, which has long been disturbing the nations of the world, should have passed beyond the sphere of politics and made its influence felt in the cognate sphere of practical economics is not surprising. The elements of the conflict now raging are unmistakable, in the vast expansion of industrial pursuits and the marvellous discoveries of science; in the changed relations between masters and workmen; in the enormous fortunes of some few individuals, and the utter poverty of the masses; the increased self-reliance and closer mutual combination of the working classes; as also, finally, in the prevailing moral degeneracy. The momentous gravity of the state of things now obtaining fills every mind with painful apprehension; wise men are discussing it; practical men are proposing schemes; popular meetings, legislatures, and rulers of nations are all busied with it - actually there is no question which has taken deeper hold on the public mind.”

Indeed, in some ways Leo was prophetic: he could see better than many heads of state the dangers of unbridled capitalism, and what needed to be done to counter its effects. Rerum Novarum is not a tract in favour of contemplative resignation in face of poverty or social injustice.

Leo saw the dangers of looking at labour and capital in terms of “class conflict”: -

> The great mistake made in regard to the matter now under consideration is to take up with the notion that class is naturally hostile to class, and that the wealthy and the working men are intended by nature to live in mutual conflict. So irrational and so false is this view that the direct contrary is the truth. Just as the symmetry of the human frame is the result of the suitable arrangement of the different parts of the body, so in a State is it ordained by nature that these two classes should dwell in harmony and agreement, so as to maintain the balance of the body politic. Each needs the other: capital cannot do without labour, nor labour without capital. Mutual agreement results in the beauty of good order, while perpetual conflict necessarily produces confusion and savage barbarity. Now, in preventing such strife as this, and in uprooting it, the efficacy of Christian institutions is marvellous and manifold. First of all, there is no intermediary more powerful than religion (whereof the Church is the interpreter and guardian) in drawing the rich and the working class together, by reminding each of its duties to the other, and especially of the obligations of justice.

Instead of class conflict Leo emphasised the common good, and that it was both the duty of the state to foster the common good and for the citizens of the state to contribute to it. Rerum Novarum saw the need for a balance between the needs of employer and employee and set out a code for good practice and relations between employer and employee. Leo gave a warning to employers: -

> Doubtless, before deciding whether wages are fair, many things have to be considered; but wealthy owners and all masters of labour should be mindful of this - that to exercise pressure upon the indigent and the destitute for the sake of gain, and to gather one's profit out of the need of another, is condemned by all laws, human and divine. To defraud any one of wages that are his due is a great crime which cries to the avenging anger of Heaven. "Behold, the hire of the labourers... which by fraud has been kept back by you, crieth; and the cry of them hath entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth."

These ideas were refined to produce what looks very much like today’s justification for a living wage: -

> Let the working man and the employer make free agreements, and in particular let them agree freely as to the wages; nevertheless, there underlies a dictate of natural justice more imperious and ancient than any bargain between man and man, namely, that wages ought not to be insufficient to support a frugal and well-behaved wage-earner. If through necessity or fear of a worse evil the workman accepts harder conditions because an employer or contractor will afford him no better, he is made the victim of force and injustice.

Rerum Novarum’s power is based on the advocacy of an ethical stance between employer and employed. Worker’s legal rights at the time were based on their contractual rights – and usually workers were employed on the basis that they could be hired and fired at will. Indeed, for some workers in Victorian England (and Scotland) hiring and firing at will was probably the least of their problems. The trade union movement struggled with such iniquities as Pitman Bonds: effectively the employee bore the risk of underproduction rather than the employer.   As well as basic ethical rights in the workplace Leo foresaw the need for effective dispute resolution in the workplace:

Should it happen that either a master or a workman believes himself injured, nothing would be more desirable than that a committee should be appointed… to settle the dispute.

This may seem relatively inconsequential, but it would take almost a century of further industrial strife in the UK before the Donovan Commission lead to creation of Industrial Tribunals.

By co-incidence, in the last years of the reign of Leo, in the UK the House of Lords heard the case of Taff Vale Railway Company v Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants. [1901]

The union had gone on strike over the treatment of one of their members, John Ewington. The railway company sued the union for the damages suffered as a result of the strike action – and won. With potential liabilities for the economic consequences of strike action the unions were deprived of their most powerful weapon. But times were changing. Leo XIII died in 1903, but in 1906 a new Liberal Government was returned to parliament in Britain. One of its earliest - and most radical - pieces of legislation was the Trade Disputes Act 1906, overturning the House of Lord’s decision in the Taff Vale case and giving trade unions immunity for losses incurred in a trade dispute.

Even in the US the excesses of capitalism were also under attack. Fr John Ryan was both a Catholic priest and an economist. In 1906, inspired both by Leo’s encyclical and informed by his own knowledge of economics he wrote “A Living Wage” arguing for a minimum wage and that such a concept had now moved from the implicit to the explicit in Catholic ethics. Leo XIII had died a few years previously, in 1903. His successors, in the next two pontificates, had reigns that were overshadowed by darkening politics and war. However, 40 years on from Rerum Novarum a new Pope. Pius XI was turned again to social teaching in Quadragesimo Anno.

No great historical insight is needed to suggest that the world in 1931 was very different to that of 1891. World war, revolution and depression affected the lives of millions. The 1930s were in some ways the centuries lost decade. With economies crumbling in Europe and the rise of totalitarianism something of Pius XI’s intention behind his encyclical can be seen from its subtitle: On the Reconstruction of the Social Order. Pius XI - Achille Ratti - was a man of action as well as a formidable intellect. As Papal Nuncio to the newly restored Polish state he had been the only diplomat who refused to leave the city when it was threatened by the advance of Red Army in 1920. Only the direct instructions of his predecessor, Benedict XV frustrated his plans to travel to Soviet Russia. In his spare time, he enjoyed climbing in the Alps, ascending many major peaks such as Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa and the Matterhorn. Credited with the first decent of the Aiguille Grises ridge of Mont Blanc, in the summer before Leo published Rerum Novarum, the route is now named the Route du Pape in his honour.  He became Pope in 1922.

It was under his reign that the Papacy regained its temporal powers, albeit as Europe’s smallest state, the Vatican City. After some years of negotiations Pius signed the Lateran Treaties in 1929 with Italy’s dictator, Benito Mussolini – and accepted reparation for the events of 1870n which have bankrolled the Vatican ever since.  In Quadragesimo Anno Pius made it clear that the Catholic Church had developed a social conscience. The Encyclical was critical of both unrestrained capitalism and socialism. Pius adopted Leo’s Thomist defence of private property but confirmed that the state had a right to pursue redistributive policies – even to the point of expropriation of property in extreme cases. Private property was subject to the common good.

It is perhaps easy to overlook that any interference in the market in the 1930s would be considered dangerously radical. The year before Quadragesimo J. M.  Keynes had published his General Theory of Money but his views were yet to gain traction: that there were alternatives to unrestrained capitalism or soviet style communism would be far from obvious in the 1930s. Whilst recession raged in Europe, not to peak until 1933, Pius like Leo before him warned against class conflict. Pius looked for solidarity between labour and capital: both sides of industry should co-operate for mutual prosperity. Fair wages played their part here. Pius saw that the ability to properly provide for a wage earner’s family was essential, although accepted wages levels were linked to the prosperity of the enterprise in which the work was carried out and the economy as a whole.

Pius could be said to be a supporter of small business and entrepreneurship and against anonymous multination undertakings in the financial service industry. The Encyclical argued for a tri-partist corporate social structure to be a middle way between communism and capitalism. In this structure government labour and capital work together for the common good. To anyone growing up in post war Britain before 1979 this would seem common sense, but, again, it was radical in the 1930s.

Pius praised Rerum Novarum, but also added to it. He extended Catholic Social teaching beyond the Catholic community to the world at large:

> [Rerum Novarum] has gradually and imperceptibly worked its way into the minds of those outside Catholic unity who do not recognise the authority of the Church. Catholic principles on the social question have as a result, passed little by little into the patrimony of all human society, and We rejoice that the eternal truths which Our Predecessor of glorious memory proclaimed so impressively have frequently invoked and defended not only in non-Catholic books and journals but in legislative halls and also courts of justice.

Pius also saw how new rights needed new laws:

> A new branch of law, wholly unknown to the earlier time, has arisen from this continuous and unearned labour to protect vigorously the sacred rights of the workers that flow from their dignity as men and as Christians. These laws undertake the protection of life, health, strength, family homes, workshops, wages and labour hazards….

Perhaps unfortunately for Pius’s name and subsequent reputation his ideas chimed with the rise of Fascist parties in Europe and then later in South America. As well as Italy, Spain, Portugal and Austria all had their own brands of fascism. His ideas did, however, also inspire Franklyn D Roosevelt, who enthusiastically praised the Encyclical and whose “New Deal” could be seen as a practical example of Pius’s ideas in action. Roosevelt even asked Fr John Ryan to deliver the benediction when he was inaugurated as President for a second term in 1937: the first Catholic priest ever to do so.  The post war world saw Pius’s influence in the German ordoliberal system, the Austrian Sozialpartnerschaft and the Nordic economies. But before any of that was to happen Europe entered its darkest period. In 1933 Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany. Pius viewed the rise of fascism with alarm, particularly after Mussolini adopted Nazi racial policies in 1938. Encyclicals attacking Fascism, Nazism and the Soviet version of Communism were penned by Pius - including the only Encyclical issued in German, Mit brennender Sorge- “With burning concern”. But Pius was weakening, and he died in February 1939.[^4]

The turmoil of war did many things. One was to introduce the social acceptability of Keynesian economics. Another was the 1945 election of Britain’s most left-wing administration: it is often overlooked that the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act was passed as a possible foundation for nationalisation of land. In 1948 Britain created its welfare state.

Nearly 100 years on from when the First Vatican Council had been abandoned, the Second Vatican Council was, in its own way, as radical as any theory of Keynes, and no more so than its recognition of religious freedoms. The Declaration of Religious Liberty states: -

> It is imperative that the right of all citizens and religious communities to religious freedom should be recognised and made effective in practice. Government is to see to it that equality of citizens before the law, which is itself an element of the common good, is never violated, whether openly or covertly, for religious reasons. Nor is there to be discrimination among citizens.

Influential in its drafting was young Polish auxiliary Bishop, Karol Wojtyla, the future John Paul II. In 1970 Paul VI celebrated the loss of temporal power of the papacy 100 years before, calling it “providential.”

But by the 1970s the post war consensus was wearing thin. The Heath administration struggled with how to bring Trade Unions within a new legal framework – and failed. At the time employment law as we know it was in its infancy. In preparation for joining what was then called the Common Market there was one issue for the government to rectify. The Treaty of Rome, the 1947 document that laid the foundation for the Common Market, had within it something quite novel for its time – the notion that men and women should be paid equally.

Through the efforts of Barbara Castle, the Equal Pay Act became law in 1970, but the idea of equal pay was so radical industry was given 5 years to put it in place.

Employment law too became a respectable area of academic study, often under the influence of continental lawyers such as Otto Kahn Freud who had found refuge in Britain and a home in the LSE in the 1930s. After the war the expansion of higher education meant that those from a wider variety of backgrounds found their way into academe. Bill Wedderburn came from an ordinary south London home, but won a scholarship to Cambridge. He became instrumental in developing an academic approach to employment rights. But still in the 1950s and 60s there was at best only rudimentary protection for individual: employment law was characterised by its role in understanding the function of trade unions, and to a great extent in keeping the law out of the workplace. As Otto Kahn Freund put it “On the labour side, power is collective power”[^5]. But that power became more controversial as the decades wore on. And the consensus as to the mixed economy began to break down. The Donovan Commission came up with the idea of individual employment rights, administered not by judges in the courts but by Industrial Tribunals. Surprisingly, at first the unions were hostile: they saw the elevation of individual rights as diluting their role in the workplace. And with increasing legalisation in the workplace unions came under greater and greater scrutiny.

In 1979 a new conservative administration came to power under Britain’s first female Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher. It is unlikely she would have had much time for Fr Ryan’s ideas. Shortly before her election as Conservative leader she visited the Conservative Research Department. A speaker had prepared a paper on the virtues of the Conservatives following a “middle way “between extremes of left and right. Margaret Thatcher is alleged to have produced a copy of Frederick Hayek’s The Constitution of Liberty and slammed it down on the table, stating “This is what we believe.”[^6]  The 1980s would be a time of ideological battles, the consequences of which still inform our lives today.

John Paul II joined that battle with Laborem Exercens. Publication was delayed from May to September 1981 following the attempt on the Pope’s life.

Whilst Margaret Thatcher was starting her stand offs with the trade union movement, both on the picket line and through legislation, in Poland the trade union Solidarity was fighting the Polish communist state. Clearly, Marx’s theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat did not work in the shipyards of Gdansk and the steel mills of Nowa Hutta. Equally, legal abstentionism in collective bargaining and industrial action wasn’t working in 1980’s Britain. Both failed in the same way: they did not recognise the function of work or the dignity of the worker, both themes of Laborem Exercens.

John Paul II saw work as an integral part of human nature, and ultimate both beneficial and life affirming. Difficult as work can be it transforms man and through it man achieves fulfilment as a human being. But the modern world degrades the dignity of work in a variety of ways: by treating work as a product to be sold, by a lack of job security, by unemployment and by underemployment. The Pope also saw both the benefit and the dangers of technology, and how if we exalt the machine, we reduce man to the status of a slave.

Turning to labour and capital John Paul II position was that labour takes precedence over capital: people are more important than things. Consequently, worker shareholders and profit-sharing schemes are praised.

Laborem Exercens introduced a concept of the indirect employer. This was a recognition that in a sense we all play a part in the development of labour policy and what a worker receives. That role could be the role of government in deciding what rights to give workers. It can also be us – when we decide to take advantage of cheaply produced goods either here or abroad: -  

> The concept of indirect employer includes both persons and institutions of various kinds, and also collective labour contracts and the principles of conduct which are laid down by these persons and institutions and which determine the whole socioeconomic system or are its result. The concept of "indirect employer" thus refers to many different elements.…When it is a question of establishing an ethically correct labour policy, all these influences must be kept in mind. A policy is correct when the objective rights of the worker are fully respected.

In many ways, our own legislation has only recently – and imperfectly – caught up with the idea of the indirect employer. The Modern Slavery Act 2015 has put reporting requirements on companies to consider their supply chains, and the working conditions within them.

Perhaps less dramatically than the issue of slavery in the modern workplace, but in fact interconnected with it is the contentious issue of economic migration. Here John Paul II saw the difficulties presented by emigration: -

> Finally, we must say at least a few words on the subject of emigration in search of work. This is an age-old phenomenon which nevertheless continues to be repeated and is still today very widespread as a result of the complexities of modern life. Man has the right to leave his native land for various motives-and also the right to return-in order to seek better conditions of life in another country. This fact is certainly not without difficulties of various kinds. Above all it generally constitutes a loss for the country which is left behind. It is the departure of a person who is also a member of a great community united by history, tradition and culture; and that person must begin life in the midst of another society united by a different culture and very often by a different language. In this case, it is the loss of a subject of work, whose efforts of mind and body could contribute to the common good of his own country, but these efforts, this contribution, are instead offered to another society which in a sense has less right to them than the person's country of origin…

The most important thing is that the person working away from his native land, whether as a permanent emigrant or as a seasonal worker, should not be placed at a disadvantage in comparison with the other workers in that society in the matter of working rights. Emigration in search of work must in no way become an opportunity for financial or social exploitation. As regards the work relationship, the same criteria should be applied to immigrant workers as to all other workers in the society concerned. The value of work should be measured by the same standard and not according to the difference in nationality, religion or race. For even greater reason the situation of constraint in which the emigrant may find himself should not be exploited. All these circumstances should categorically give way, after special qualifications have of course been taken into consideration, to the fundamental value of work, which is bound up with the dignity of the human person. Once more the fundamental principle must be repeated: the hierarchy of values and the profound meaning of work itself require that capital should be at the service of labour and not labour at the service of capital.

Have we lived up to these provisions? Perhaps. The courts here have perhaps been more progressive than Parliament. The UK, together with Denmark and Ireland, opted out of EU Directive on Sanctions against Illegally Staying Third-country Nationals.[^7]The idea behind the Directive is to penalise the employers of cheap undocumented labour. In a written ministerial statement laid before the House of Commons by Damian Green, the then Coalition Government explained its reasoning: -

Whilst sympathetic to the objectives behind this measure…there were significant aspects of the draft Directive which the UK did not support. These included These included the creation of additional administrative burdens on both employers and the public sector in requiring employers to notify the authorities every time they recruit new third country national employees and in requiring compliance inspections….The Directive also guaranteed additional rights to illegally staying employees, including provision of back payments where an employee has earned less than the minimum national wage, which would be difficult to administer and would send the wrong message by  rewarding breaches of immigration legislation.[^8]

Instead of which, the continuing criminalisation of the undocumented worker positively incentives the unscrupulous employer. Laborem Exercens clearly does not chime with this policy. Laborem Exercens also recognised the way in which rich industrialised countries (and their corporations) could exploit trade with poorer countries: -

> For instance, the highly industrialized countries, and even more the businesses that direct on a large scale the means of industrial production (the companies referred to as multinational or transnational), fix the highest possible prices for their products, while trying at the same time to fix the lowest possible prices for raw materials or semi-manufactured goods. This is one of the causes of an ever-increasing disproportion between national incomes. The gap between most of the richest countries and the poorest ones is not diminishing or being stabilized but is increasing more and more, to the detriment, obviously, of the poor countries.

John Paul II also considered the rights of those with disabilities, and their entitlement to participate within the world of work: -

> Recently, national communities and international organizations have turned their attention to another question connected with work, one full of implications: the question of disabled people. They too are fully human subjects with corresponding innate, sacred and inviolable rights, and, in spite of the limitations and sufferings affecting their bodies and faculties, they point up more clearly the dignity and greatness of man. Since disabled people are subjects with all their rights, they should be helped to participate in the life of society in all its aspects and at all the levels accessible to their capacities. The disabled person is one of us and participates fully in the same humanity that we possess. It would be radically unworthy of man, and a denial of our common humanity, to admit to the life of the community, and thus admit to work, only those who are fully functional. To do so would be to practise a serious form of discrimination, that of the strong and healthy against the weak and sick. Work in the objective sense should be subordinated, in this circumstance too, to the dignity of man, to the subject of work and not to economic advantage.

At the time, there was no specific protection for the disabled in the workplace. Only with extensive lobbying did the conservative government, under John Major, introduce the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, borrowing most of the content of the Act from the US – the Americans with Disabilities Act 1990.

As the 1980s wore on the mixed economy consensus of the 1970s gave way to a consensus on economic liberalism. The Berlin Wall came down in 1989 and for a time is seemed as if economic liberalism was the answer to all the world’s ills. The 1980 too had seen trade union power successfully curbed in a series of statutes starting with Jim Prior’s Employment Act of 1980. Both left and right got used to the idea of individuals bring claims for unfair and discrimination through tribunals, rather than unions supporting their members through industrial action.

And instead of relying on union based local agreements for workers’ rights new levels of protection came into our domestic law from the European Community, and after the name change following Maastricht, the European Union.

Whilst soon to be a matter of history for the UK, (perhaps) the EU’s freedom of movement for capital, goods, services and labour have always been tempered by the idea of a Social Charter: within the EU, for example, there are universal rights as regards holidays and the right to enjoy maternity and family friendly employment provisions. With these rights comes the justification for allowing the free movement rights of workers to “trump” locally agreed wage rates, see Laval Partneri Ltd v Svenska Byggnadsarbetareforbundt [2008] IRLR 160.

Should - or must - work place ethics remain constant?  Whilst the general the trend of government -  whether labour, conservative or coalition - in the UK over the last 30 years has been to increase rights associated with employment (but necessarily the means by which such rights can be enforced) industry and capital has devised ever more ingenious ways of circumventing those very rights. The reason for this is clear: cost. To give an employee the full panoply of rights comes at a price: they are not easy to sack, they are entitled to holidays, to the minimum wage, to flexible working and so on.

Back in the 1960s the construction industry was notorious for the “lump” - unregulated labourers hired on the basis that they were not workers but “self-employed”. That trend has spread into surprisingly diverse areas, coupled with opportunities given by technology both to replace human workers, but also to “offshore “employment to areas of the world where labour costs are cheaper. And even with workers within the UK ever more ingenious schemes are devised with the intention of reducing labour costs – usually by removing costs associated with employee status. The years since Laborem Exercens have seen the rise of what some call the “gig” economy.

Famously, Tom Goodwin wrote in 2013: -

> Uber, the world’s largest taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world’s most popular media owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate. Something interesting is happening.[^9]

Interesting perhaps, but modern technology presents as big a challenge to the ethics of the workplace now as unmitigated capitalism and child labour did in Victorian England.

The terms “zero hours contract” has also gained common currency, although strictly there is no actual legal definition of the term. Parliament has moved to give some protection, outlawing exclusivity clause for example[^10].

However, this still means that growing numbers of workers in the UK now earn their wages through “precarious” employment relations – ostensibly no strong personal rights to job protection and no certainty over levels of pay. In the UK some six years or so before Laborem Exercens was published 8.7% of the work force was self-employed. Now that figure is over 15%. But the earnings of the self-employed have fallen 20% since 2008.

A word of explanation is needed as to the problems thus created and the court’s and tribunal’s responses to them. Perhaps regrettably courts in the UK classify the question of whether someone is an “employee”, self-employed, or, now a “worker” as a question of fact and law to be decided on a case by case basis. If the labourer falls within an unprotected grouping, he or she becomes cheaper to hire – and to fire. But this also means that unless a worker is up to the challenge his or her rights may as well be illusory. Some have described the way industry has adopted to switch the cost burden on to workers as “Darwinian”.

Back when Laborem Exercens was written technology was already seen as a challenge to the ethical in the workplace: -

> While it may seem that in the industrial process it is the machine that "works" and man merely supervises it, making it function and keeping it going in various ways, it is also true that for this very reason industrial development provides grounds for reproposing in new ways the question of human work. Both the original industrialization that gave rise to what is called the worker question and the subsequent industrial and post-industrial changes show in an eloquent manner that, even in the age of ever more mechanized "work", the proper subject of work continues to be man.

> The development of industry and of the various sectors connected with it, even the most modern electronics technology, especially in the fields of miniaturization, communications and telecommunications and so forth, shows how vast is the role of technology, that ally of work that human thought has produced, in the interaction between the subject and object of work (in the widest sense of the word). Understood in this case not as a capacity or aptitude for work, but rather as a whole set of instruments which man uses in his work, technology is undoubtedly man's ally. It facilitates his work, perfects, accelerates and augments it. It leads to an increase in the quantity of things produced by work, and in many cases improves their quality. However, it is also a fact that, in some instances, technology can cease to be man's ally and become almost his enemy, as when the mechanization of work "supplants" him, taking away all personal satisfaction and the incentive to creativity and responsibility, when sought it deprives many workers of their previous employment, or when, through exalting the machine, it reduces man to the status of its slave.

This was an analysis of the technological challenge that many would have accepted in the 1980s. Is the analysis adequate for today? Nearly 36 years on from Laborem it is not surprising that technology has developed in ways that may not have been anticipated then – and which put the whole question of work and its regulation into an entirely new sphere.

John Paul II saw technology as a tool and facilitator but saw that it could also reduce man to the status of a slave. The present reality may be even more problematical for humanity. The increase in “platforms” for workers, based on the fiction that the employer is just a supply of leads for the worker, is perhaps just the start of a technological revolution no less fundamental that the Industrial Revolution of the nineteenth century. AI may one day wipe out the need for work at all: but if it does what happens to the workers and their dependents?

Rerum Novarum, Quadragesimo Anno and Laborem Exercens are a testimony a breadth of vision spanning 130 years of tumultuous world history and social change. Their concerns for the worker and a just society are a legacy to us that should transcend any narrow confessional or philosophical viewpoint.

In 2021 it will be 40 years on from Laborem Exercens. The ethical heart of the Encyclical will apply to any situation where the age-old conflict of capital and labour joins issue. But as technology continues to ease the burden of toil will we cease to be homo faber – and if that happens will humankind prosper in its newfound leisure, or wither away?

## Bibliographic Note

The starting point for any reading here must be the Encyclicals themselves. 

These are available to down load from the Vatican web site: 

* http://w2.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_l-xiii_enc_15051891_rerum-novarum.html 
* https://w2.vatican.va/content/pius-xi/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_p-xi_enc_19310515_quadragesimo-anno.html
* http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_jp-ii_enc_14091981_laborem-exercens.html

A broader view of Catholic Social Teaching is set out in Donal Dorr’s Option for the Poor and for the Earth Orbis Books, and Clifford Longley Just Money: How Catholic Social Teaching Can Redeem Capitalism Theos.

[^1]: See, for example, the interesting case of a Catholic Professor sacked by a Catholic University who refused to pay union dues because he believed the union was a body advocating abortion, Roesser v. University of Detroit and University of Detroit Professors Association/ MEA/NEA, 904 F.2d 331 (6th Cir. 1990)

[^2]: Just what Nietzsche meant needs more than just a footnote. Better still, read Thus Spoke Zarathustra and The Gay Science

[^3]: The Rome of the Middle Ages claimed universal monarchy. The modern Church of Rome has abandoned nothing, retracted nothing. Is that all? Far from it. The worst by far is that whereas, in the national Churches and communities of the Middle Ages, there was a brisk, vigorous, and constant opposition to these outrageous claims, an opposition which stoutly asserted its own orthodoxy, which always caused itself to be respected, and which even sometimes gained the upper hand; now, in this nineteenth century of ours, and while it is growing old this same opposition has been put out of court, and judicially extinguished within the Papal Church, by the recent decrees of the Vatican. And it is impossible for persons accepting those decrees justly to complain, when such documents are subjected in good faith to a strict examination as respects their compatibility with civil right and the obedience of subjects... Rome has substituted for the proud boast of semper eadem, a policy of violence and change in faith...and paraded anew every rusty tool she was fondly thought to have disused.

[^4]: Conspiracy theorist fans might note the name of the doctor treating the Pope: Petracci, in fact the father of Mussolini’s mistress, Laura Petracci. The politics of his successor, Pius XII, remain controversial: was he a crypto Nazi – or an unrecognized opponent of the Hitler regime and organiser of anti-Nazi resistance? For an exposition of the latter view see Church of Spies: The Pope’s War against Hitler, by Mark Reibling.

[^5]: Otto Kahn Freund Labour and the Law 3rd Edition London 1983

[^6]: John Ranelagh, Thatcher’s People:  An Insider’s Account of the Politics, the Power, and the Personalities.  London: HarperCollins , 1991.

[^7]: 2009/52/EC Admittedly, perhaps not the catchiest of titles. The UK could opt out because of reserved powers under Title V of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union.

[^8]: www.gov.uk/government/speeches/eu-directive-on-sanctions-against-employers-of-illegally-staying-third-country-nationals Accessed 25/10/2015

[^9]: Tom Goodwin: The Crunch Network: The Battle Is for The Customer Interface

[^10]: The Exclusivity Terms in Zero Hours Contracts (Redress) Regulations SI 2015/2021, in force from 11th January 2016