+++
date = '2019-07-15T00:00:00+00:00'
title = 'Errors of Law'
description = 'Errors of law and the right to appeal in employment cases: what can be learnt from different jurisdictions?'
+++

# Errors of law and the right to appeal in employment cases: what can be learnt from different jurisdictions?

> Against that positivism which stops before phenomena, saying "there are only facts," I should say: no, it is precisely facts that do not exist, only interpretations…
> - Friedrich Nietzsche, translated by Walter Kaufmann, The Portable Nietzsche 

“This is a convenient moment” said His Honour David Richardson[^1], “to remind ourselves of the EAT’s statutory remit. This is restricted to hearing appeals of questions of law….The EAT is concerned to see whether the ET has applied correct legal principles and reached findings and conclusions which are sufficiently reasoned and supportable, that is to say not perverse, if the correct legal principles are applied. A finding or conclusion is perverse if and only if it is one which no reasonable tribunal, on a proper appreciation of the evidence and the law, would have reached. Subject to this limited appeal Parliament has made ETs the arbiters of all questions of fact.”

Most lawyers will have reacted to that passage with approval: it neatly encapsulates the limited scope for appeals from the Employment Tribunal to the next rung up the judicial ladder – the Employment Appeal Tribunal. Nothing in that passage is likely to bring about feelings of heterodoxy, still less to question what is obviously legally correct. But non lawyers, if not too overawed by the majesty of the law, might start playing around a bit with the words deployed in the passage. Is “not perverse” really the same thing as “sufficiently reasoned and supportable”? Sufficiently reasoned and supportable by whom? By the employment tribunal, of course. But isn’t that the tribunal whose decision some unlucky litigant is trying to impugn as perverse…?

Well, leaving that example of circularity for one moment there is a practical point:  litigation, like other good things, must come to an end sometime, and the decision to grant, to hear, and ultimately to reverse, a first instance decision should not be lightly dispensed. The case for a degree of finality in civil matters is clear, but so too is the need for predictability and certainty in what the law is the application of the law. For the last three centuries, with the rise of science and reason as a way to explain the world, as opposed to, say, theology or philosophy, we have become used to the idea that there is a right or wrong answer to any given problem. Law is sometimes classified as one of the social sciences: whether “social” here means anything more than “non” I shall leave hanging, but whilst a scientific theory is only acceptable because it gives the right answer to a given set of facts, law does not work this way. As a common law system, the law requires wrong decisions to be corrected by a hierarchy of appellate courts: scarce resources though determine the frequency of how often cases get to be appealed just as much as an imagined scientific or analytical logic, still less inherent merits, and to this end the concept of the error of law can be infinitely adaptable, whilst giving an apparent quasi analytical gloss to the decision to allow or deny an appeal.

Whilst the elegant summary from His Honour David Richardson is legally correct the concept of an error of law is about as far as it is possible to get from something that can be explained in the same way as a scientific theory or an algebraic equation.   

The concept – the idea of an error of law -  is not, of course, the exclusive prerogative of employment lawyers. Different legal disciplines, such as administrative law, tax law and the law of arbitration, all employ the concept of restricting appeals to those cases where an error of law can be demonstrated. Indeed, the concept of an error of law came into being long before there was any right not to be unfairly dismissed or any other of our modern employment rights. That might suggest that a principle that has long exercised the courts should by now have matured into a coherent body of law capable of giving a straightforward answer to what is an error of law.

A conventional starting point in the case of an employment law and errors of law might be, or perhaps should be (?),  the EAT Practice Statement[^2] which lists two cases under the rubric of “Error of Law (jurisdiction of the EAT)”, British Telecommunications v Sheridan [1990] IRLR 27, and Brent London Borough Council v Fuller [2011] ICR 806.

Sheridan was a constructive dismissal claim. The Claimant, Mr Sheridan had been demoted following disciplinary issues: by a majority the Industrial Tribunal found no fundamental breach in the employer’s action. On appeal to the EAT under Garland J[^3] the decision was reversed. However, a further appeal to the Court of Appeal (Lord Donaldson MR, Ralph Gibson and McCowan LJJ) restored the Industrial Tribunals decision. In so doing Lord Donaldson MR disapproved an earlier decision of Phillips J in Watling v William Bird & Son Contractors Ltd[^4]. Phillips J had, in the latter, considered that there were three alternative categories of the error of law – misapplying the law, misunderstanding the facts, or perversity. Lord Donaldson MR disowned the second category: Ralph Gibson LJ, without dissenting, left the door open just a bit to the possibility of Phillips J’s second category.[^5] So, what do we learn from that: does that mean that an error of law only occurs when the law is misapplied, or if the decision is perverse? That would be a logical conclusion from including Sheridan in the Practice Statement. But that conclusion may very well be wrong – for reasons set out below.

Extra judicially we do know what Phillips J’s own views were on what he had intended the appellate function of the EAT to be, and hence the scope of the error of law. Writing in the Industrial Law Journal in 1978[^6] Phillips J considered that the EAT could define an error of law, in the context at least of paragraph 6(8) of the First Schedule to the Industrial Relations Act 1974[^7], simply as something that the EAT thought was “wrong”:

If one were looking for a formula, it would perhaps be right to say that if we, that is to say, the judge, the representative of the employers and the representatives of the workers[^8], are individually and collectively satisfied that the decision is “wrong,” judged by the standards of good industrial practice, we feel justified in saying that the decision is a contrary one, and is wrong in point of law.[^9]  

Having considered an example of where an error of law would always be apparent – the construction of a statute – he then went on to cite a tax case, Edwards v Bairstow[^10] to illustrate how what might look like fact could really be law.

In that case the House of Lords had overturned the High Court and the Court of Appeal. Both Courts had refused to interfere with a decision of the Commissioners for the General Purposes of Income Tax. The Commissioners had made findings that the purchase and sale of a spinning plant was, as a matter of fact, not “an adventure in the nature of trade” and thus relieved the taxpayer of certain obligations to pay tax on the profit. As the finding that the sale and purchase was, factually, not an “adventure” then there could be no error of law and thus no basis to interfere with the Commissioner’s findings – or at least that was the view of both the High Court and the Court of Appeal.  The House of Lords disagreed. As Lord Radcliffe put it: -

If the Case [^i.e. the Case stated, then part of the appeal process] contains anything ex facie which is bad law and which bears on the determination, it is, obviously, erroneous in point of law. But, without any such misconception appearing ex facie, it may be that the facts found are such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the relevant law could have come to the determination under appeal. In those circumstances, too the court must intervene. It has no option but to assume that there has been some misconception of the law …I do not think that it much matters whether this state of affairs is described as one in which there is no evidence to support the determination, or as one in which the evidence is inconsistent with, and contradictory of, the determination, or as one in which the true and only reasonable conclusion contradicts the determination. Rightly understood, each phrase propounds the same test. For my part, I prefer the last of the three, since I think that it is rather misleading to speak of there being no evidence to support a conclusion when, in cases such as these, many of the facts are likely to be neutral in themselves and only to take their colour from the combination of circumstances in which they are found to occur.[^11]

What Lord Radcliffe was doing here was really setting out the four concepts that would permit an appeal where such appeals had to be based on an error of law: -

* The “ex facie” bad law finding. This should be reasonable straightforward: to give a trite example, a tribunal finding it had jurisdiction to hear a complaint where the claimant had only one year’s service would be simply wrong;
* The finding that was unsupported by any evidence;
* The finding was contradicted by the evidence – in other words the inference drawn from the primary findings was wrong;
* Regardless of the evidence found, the actual determination was perverse.
 

The last three are those categories that Phillips J was to later identify in Watling[^12], and of course include the category that Lord Donaldson disapproved in Sherridan. Interestingly Phillips J, in his ILJ article, had classified all the last three as examples of the same thing – perversity appeals, but perhaps with a much lower threshold to cross than is usually associated now with that term.  For Phillips J, back in the 1970s, this had the advantage of allowing the EAT to be a body that would build up guidance on good industrial practices.

But that broad approach was not to last, even if the specifics in Sherridan are ignored   Four years after Some Notes on the Employment Appeal Tribunal came Browne Wilkinson J, again writing in the Industrial Law Journal: The Employment Appeal Tribunal in the 1980s[^13] By the time of the second article Browne Wilkinson J noted that Phillips J’s approach was no longer good law. What had changed? Two Court of Appeal decisions Retarded Children’s Society v Day[^14] and Bailey v BP Oil (Kent Refinery) Ltd[^15] made it clear that construing what was then section 57(3) of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 was a question of fact: Bailey completed the emasculation of the EAT by holding that not only was the construction of the section a matter of fact, but it was not for the appellate Tribunal to make guidelines, rules and presumptions for the first instance tribunal to follow. Both cases were concerned with what in a broader context was a narrow point: how should “reasonableness” be viewed. In so construing section 57 (3) as a matter of fact the role of the EAT was hugely restricted – and that restrictive attitude spread beyond just the question of construing section 57 (3).

Indeed, the second of the Practice Statement cases, Brent London Borough Council v Fuller, confirms this point.[^16] However, Fuller was a majority decision, and even the leading judgment by Mummery LJ acknowledges the difficulties of the law/ fact divide: -

> As an appeal lies only on a question of law, the difference between legal questions and findings of fact and inferences is crucial. Appellate bodies learn more from experience than from precept or instruction how to spot the difference between a real question of law and a challenge to primary findings of fact dressed up as law.

Another teaching of experience is that, as with other tribunals and courts, there are occasions when a correct self-direction of law is stated by the ET, but then overlooked or misapplied at the point of decision. The ET judgment must be read carefully to see if it has in fact correctly applied the law which it said was applicable. The reading of an ET decision must not, however, be so fussy that it produces pernickety critiques. Over-analysis of the reasoning process; being hypercritical of the way in which the decision is written; focusing too much on particular passages or turns of phrase to the neglect of the decision read in the round: those are all appellate weaknesses to avoid.”[^17]

So, if, having read the cases in the Practice Statement, the reader is still hungry for an explanation of the idea of an error of law what can you turn to for satisfaction? The different jurisdictions mentioned above - administrative law, tax and arbitration - have also faced the same issue: their solution to just when an error of law arises sometimes contrasts and sometimes aligns with what might be expected in the employment field.

## Administrative Law

An appropriate starting point with different jurisdictions is administrative law in its various guises. The idea of a reviewable error of law is fundamental here, whether as a means of controlling lower courts, or in challenging of decisions made by administrative tribunals.  Both have a long history, and reflecting the Employment Tribunals ‘own genesis out of the deliberations of the Franks’ Report, the DNA of administrative law has been absorbed at least in part by the employment tribunal.

At the time of writing administrative law is still one of those core subjects that future lawyers are supposed to study at undergraduate level. Even if a lawyer moves into different areas of the law there will be some half-remembered concepts and terminology from the subject. So, by way of the reminder, going back into legal history, a decision by a lower court could be reviewed though the Court of King’s Bench issuing a prerogative writ – certiorari, mandamus, prohibition and habeas corpus. Administrative decisions made by a justice of the peace could be challenged by a statutory appeal to the King’s Bench, and there was also the possibility of a collateral challenge in tort. With the twentieth century, and in particular the demands created by two world wars and the creation of the welfare state, the executive grew, with the courts generally adopting a “restraint model” when it came to challenging– or ignoring - ministers’ powers. Things changed after the Second World War, as executive powers grew ever greater. Judges such as Lord Denning and Lord Reid adopted an “activist model” and in a series of decision from the 1940s to the 1980s they and other judges created modern administrative law.

In one area, too, judicial review and employment law continue to currently co - exist. The challenge to a decision of the Central Arbitration Committee on union recognition or derecognition goes not to the EAT (as would a challenge concerning the CAC’s powers in connection with consultation rights) but is only reviewable by way of judicial review, see R (Kwik Fit (GB) ltd. V. Central Arbitration Committee.[^18]

How is an error of law defined in the context of administrative law?

Consider the facts in the case of Jones (by Caldwell) v. First Tier Tribunal[^19]

 On 18 January 2005, at about 2.20 am, Mr Gareth Jones was driving a Highways Agency gritter along the nearside of a six-lane carriageway at the intersection of the A592 and the M25. Slightly ahead of him, in the central lane of the north bound carriageway, was an articulated lorry driven by Mr Brian Nash. Ahead of him there was a car which was parked on the hard shoulder of the carriageway. As Mr Nash’s lorry approached a man -
Barry Hughes - ran from near the car into the middle of the central lane, turned towards the lorry, stood in its path and raised his arms. Mr Nash braked, but he was unable to avoid hitting Mr Hughes, who was killed instantly. As a result of the braking the rear nearside corner of the articulated lorry swerved into the path of the gritter vehicle. There was a collision between the two vehicles, as a result of which the cab of the gritter was destroyed and Mr Jones was thrown from it onto the roadway. He suffered very severe injuries. An inquest into Mr Hughes’ death returned an open verdict: it was, however, common ground the he intended to kill himself.  

On 17 May 2007, acting by his mother Mrs Maureen Caldwell, Mr Jones applied to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority for an award of compensation under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme 2001. On 6 March 2008 he was informed by the CICA that it was unable to make an award under the Scheme. The reason that was given for this decision was that the Scheme provided that compensation was payable only if the claimant was the victim of a criminal injury. The CICA had obtained details of the incident from the police and the doctors who provided treatment, but it had been unable to pinpoint a crime of violence of which Mr Jones was a victim which would have enabled an award to be made. Were they right?

Mr Jones appealed to the First Tier Tribunal, on the basis that he had been a victim of Mr Hughes, who, he argued, had committed an offence under either section 22A of the Road Traffic Act 1988, and/or under section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861. The FTT refused an appeal, on the basis that there was no evidence before the CICA that Mr Hughes had shown any intention to cause harm or was reckless about causing harm: either was necessary to establish an offence had been committed under section 20. Nor had Mr Hughes been guilty of a breach of section 22A.

An appeal to the Upper Tier Tribunal under section 15 of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 was unsuccessful, but then Mr Jones appealed to the Court of Appeal, this time pursuant to section 13 of the same Act. The Court (Mummery, Rix and Patten LJJ) allowed the appeal, Patten LJ giving the lead judgment. To the latter the question of whether an offence under section 20 had been committed was a question of law, and thus appealable: -

> They [the FTT] are required to weigh up the evidence and decide whether it supports a finding that a relevant criminal offence has been committed. As part of this process, they have to decide what primary facts are established and what inferences it is permissible to draw from those facts. But in this case I do not accept that the determination as to whether a section 20 offence is a crime of violence within the Scheme rules is anything but a question of law which can only admit of one answer.

The Court of Appeal remitted the matter back to a different FTT, directing that it look again at whether or not Mr Hughes had been reckless for the purposes of section 20. However, the CICA then in turn appealed to the Supreme Court, who restored the decision of the FTT. The original FTT’s decision that no section 20 offence had been committed was one of fact, not law, and therefore the Court of Appeal were wrong to remit. According to Lord Hope: -

> it is reasonably clear… that the FTT were not satisfied that Mr Hughes actually foresaw that his behaviour might cause physical harm to others.  So it was not persuaded that he had the necessary mens rea of recklessness to bring his actions within a section 20 offence.  The Upper Tribunal made it clear in its judgment that the FTT’s reasoning should be read in this way. It concluded that the FTT’s finding that Mr Jones had not established that Mr Hughes was reckless was one to which a rational tribunal could have come and that it was not its function as an appellate body to substitute its own opinion of the facts even if it had been different from that of the tribunal…. Fairly read, therefore, the reason why Mr Jones’ appeal to the FTT failed was that it was not proved that an offence of the kind described by section 20 had been committed by Mr Hughes. 

I suspect that this approach will chime with employment lawyers. Part of the problem here appears to be that the FTT relied entirely on police evidence which was essentially factual: going through the circumstances of Mr Hughes’ dash into the road and the assumption of both his suicidal intentions and a lack of foresight on his part because of them. Any fact finding by the FTT based on evidence adduced at first instance would at least have opened the possibility that the conclusion drawn from those facts was the question of law as found by the Court of Appeal. Contrast this with a situation where an FTT made findings of fact that a criminal, although reckless, had no intention to cause harm, and thus no section 20 offence had occurred. Lord Hope and Lord Carnwath gave the leading judgments. According to Lord Hope: -

> A pragmatic approach should be taken to the dividing line between law and fact, so that the expertise of tribunals at the first tier and that of the Upper Tribunal can be used to best effect. An appeal court should not venture too readily into this area by classifying issues as issues of law which are really best left for determination by the specialist appellate tribunals.

Lord Hope was essentially privileging the specialist tribunals approach over that of the (non-specialist) Court of Appeal. Lord Carnwath developed the concept of a blurred boundary between law and fact still further, ironically citing in support an employment case:

> …it was hoped that the Upper Tribunal might be permitted to interpret “points of law” flexibly to include other points of principle or even factual judgment of general relevance to the specialised area in question. That might have seemed controversial. However, as an approach it was not out of line with the developing jurisprudence in the appellate courts. In Moyna v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2003] 1 WLR 1929, paras 20-28, Lord Hoffmann, in the leading speech, had considered the interpretation by the social security commissioners of the so-called “cooking test” for welfare benefits. He rejected the submission that, because the words used were ordinary English words, it should be treated as a pure question of fact, following Lord Reid’s well known comments on the meaning of the words “insulting behaviour” in Cozens v Brutus [1973] AC 854, 861, which Lord Hoffmann thought had been given “a much wider meaning than the author intended” (para 23)…

…Lord Hoffmann took this line of thinking a stage further in Lawson v Serco [2006] ICR 250, where the issue was the application of the Employment Rights Act 1996 to “peripatetic employments”, involving substantial work outside the UK. He described this as “a question of law, although involving judgment in the application of the law to the facts” (para 24). Under the heading “fact or law”, he said (para 34):

> Like many such decisions, it does not involve any finding of primary facts (none of which appear to have been in dispute) but an evaluation of those facts to decide a question posed by the interpretation which I have suggested should be given to section 94(1), namely that it applies to peripatetic employees who are based in Great Britain. Whether one characterizes this as a question of fact depends, as I pointed out in Moyna v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2003] UKHL 44; [2003] 1 WLR 1929, upon whether as a matter of policy one thinks that it is a decision which an appellate body with jurisdiction limited to errors of law should be able to review. I would be reluctant, at least at this stage in the development of a post-section 196 jurisprudence, altogether to exclude a right of appeal. In my opinion therefore, the question of whether, on given facts, a case falls within the territorial scope of section 94(1) should be treated as a question of law. On the other hand, it is a question of degree on which the decision of the primary fact-finder is entitled to considerable respect. In the present case I think not only that the Tribunal was entitled to reach the conclusion which it did but also that it was right….

Just in case anyone missed the revolutionary content of what Lord Carnwath was saying he rammed the point home by quoting from his own academic writing, in Tribunal Justice, A New Start [2009] PL 48 pp 63-64:

> The idea that the division between law and fact should come down to a matter of expediency might seem almost revolutionary. However, the passage did not attract any note of dissent or caution from the other members of the House. That it was intended to signal a new approach was confirmed in another recent case relating to a decision of an employment tribunal, Lawson v Serco.

It seems now to be authoritatively established that the division between law and fact in such classification cases is not purely objective but must take account of factors of ‘expediency’ or ‘policy’. Those factors include the utility of an appeal, having regard to the development of the law in the particular field, and the relative competencies in that field of the tribunal of fact on the one hand, and the appellate court on the other. Secondly, even if such a question is classed as one of law, the view of the tribunal of fact must still be given weight.”

Perhaps Fuller and Brent should be replaced by Lawson v Serco? 

## Tax Law

Turning to tax, Edwards v Bairstow was of course a tax case: as with employment the question of an error of law is equally essential for appellate purpose. 

In Pendragon plc v HMRC[^20] the issue was the correct assessment of VAT on demonstrator cars, which had been displayed in car dealership showrooms run by the Pendragon group. This being a tax case the corporate structure was somewhat complex.  The group consisted of a holding company, Pendragon plc (“Pendragon”), four ‘dealership companies’, three ‘captive leasing companies’ and a further sales subsidiary.

The dealership sold the demonstrator cars as second-hand cars; as tax buffs will know, under the VAT (Cars) Order 1992, dealers in second-hand goods are allowed to charge VAT only on the profit margin in certain circumstances. Pendragon put in place a complex structure which enabled the recovery input tax on the price of the cars while avoiding output tax on the onward sale to consumers. HMRC argued that, although the scheme technically worked, the transactions were an abusive practice under what are called the “Halifax”[^21] principles, namely, that the transactions resulted in a tax advantage to the taxpayer (Pendragon) contrary to the purpose of the Sixth VAT Directive and national implementing legislation; and objectively, the essential aim of the transactions was to obtain that tax advantage.
The First Tier Tax Tribunal held that the essential aim of the transaction was not to avoid VAT, and therefore allowed Pendragon’s appeal. This decision was overturned by the Upper Tribunal, which disagreed and substituted its own judgment on the facts that the essential aim of the structure was to avoid VAT.

The question before the Court of Appeal was whether the UT was right in substituting its own judgment as to what the essential aim of the structure was. The Court of Appeal determined that this question was partly a matter of fact and partly a matter of law and, as there had been no error of law by the FTT, HMRC had to show that no reasonable tribunal could have reached the decision that the FTT reached: the Court of Appeal considered that the UT had overstepped its proper appellate role by substituting its own decision for that of the FTT based on an evaluation of competing factors (both fact and law).

So far, for employment lawyers, this is all familiar territory: the UT were doing exactly what the EAT had been warned off doing, in cases like Day. However, the case then went on to the Supreme Court.  At this point it is worth noting the framework for appeals from the FTT to the UT, and from the UT to the Court of Appeal, to be found in sections 11 and 12 of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

Section 11 has some typical statutory language, not so different than section 21 of the Employment Tribunals Act 1996:

For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to a right of appeal is to a right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on any point of law arising from a decision made by the First-tier Tribunal….

Section 12 then adds some provisions which will seem quite surprising to anyone used to litigating in the EAT: where the FTT has erred in law, given the specialist role of the UT, they may actually remake the FTT’s decision, see section 12 (2) (a) and (b), and that re-making includes making further findings of fact in light of the correct approach to the law.

In Pendragon plc Lord Sumption gave the lead judgment, overturning the Court of Appeal and restoring the UT’s decision. However, it is what Lord Carnwath said that is of particular interest for present purposes:

> The difficult concept of “abuse of law” as developed by the European court, though not strictly one  of  statutory  construction,  is  a  general  principle  of  central importance  to  the  operation  of  the  VAT  scheme.  It matters little whether it is described as involving an issue of mixed law and fact, or of the evaluation of facts in accordance with legal principle. However it is described, it was clearly one which was particularly well suited to detailed consideration by the Upper Tribunal, with a view to giving guidance for future cases.  Having found errors of approach in the consideration by the First Tier Tribunal, it was appropriate for them to exercise their power to remake  the  decision,  making  such  factual and  legal  judgments  as  were necessary for the purpose, thereby giving full scope for detailed discussion of the principle  and  its  practical  application.  Although no doubt paying respect to the factual findings of the First Tier Tribunal, they were not bound by them. They had all the documentation before the First Tier Tribunal, including witness statements, and transcripts of the evidence and submissions, and detailed written and oral submissions. It is clear that they undertook a thorough exercise involving a hearing lasting six days.

> Against this background, it was unhelpful, in my view for the Court of Appeal to identify the main issue as to whether the Upper Tribunal went beyond its proper appellate role. The appeal to the Court of Appeal (under section13) was from the decision of the Upper Tribunal, not from the First Tier, and their function was to determine whether the Upper Tribunal had erred in law. That was best approached by looking primarily at the merits of the Upper Tribunal’s reasoning in its own terms, rather than by reference to their evaluation of the First Tier’s decision. True it is that the Upper Tribunal’s jurisdiction to intervene had to begin from a finding of an error of “law”. But that was not the main issue in the appeal, which was one of more general principle. Indeed, given the difficulties of drawing a clear division between fact and law, discussed by Lord Hoffmann, it may not be productive for the higher courts to spend time inquiring whether a difference between the two tribunals was one of law or fact, or a mixture of the two. There may in theory be a case, where it can be shown that the sole disagreement between the two tribunals related to an issue of pure fact, but such a case is likely to be exceptional. In the present case, as Lord Sumption has shown, there were  no  significant  issues  of  primary  fact.  The differences between the two tribunals related to the understanding of the “abuse of law” principle, and their evaluation of the facts in the light of that understanding. The Upper Tribunal reached a carefully reasoned conclusion on law and fact. The task of the Court of Appeal was to determine whether that conclusion disclosed any error of law.

## Arbitration

My interest in the different approaches to the question of what an error of law is was first aroused by an arbitration case, Danish Kaneria v The English and Wales Cricket Board[^22]. The case involved allegations of match fixing by the Claimant, Danish Kaneria, a Pakistani national who played for Essex County Cricket. The Defendant, the English and Welsh Cricket Board (“ECB”) is the body responsible for regulating all aspects of cricket.   Mr.  Kaneria induced Mervyn Westfield, an Essex fast bowler, to concede 12 runs in a one day match with Durham, in return for a payment of £6000, a practice known as “spot-fixing”. Mr Westfield received a sentence of four months imprisonment: he was also banned from playing cricket for 5 years. Disciplinary proceedings were brought against Mr Kaneria. The matter went first to the ECB’s Disciplinary Panel, who imposed a life ban and a costs award of £100,000.00 after a five-day hearing.

Mr Kaneria appealed, and the appeal was heard by an Arbitral Panel set up by the ECB but operating as arbitrators under the Arbitration Act 1996. The Arbitral Panel upheld the life ban and imposed a further costs order of another £100,000. As the Panel operated under the 1996 Act that left Mr Kaneria’s only option for any redress as an appeal under that Act.

Which was why my interest became engaged. Appeals are dealt with by section 69 of the Act, which states: -

***
**69 Appeal on point of Law**

(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party to arbitral proceedings may (upon notice to the other parties and to the tribunal) appeal to the court on a question of law arising out of an award made in the proceedings.
*** 

Contrast and compare those words with the familiar provisions of section 21(1) of the Employment Tribunals Act, 1996: -

***
**21 Jurisdiction of Appeal Tribunal**

(1) An appeal lies to the Appeal Tribunal on any question of law arising from any decision of, or arising in any proceedings before, an employment tribunal….
*** 

Or, indeed, with the provisions governing an appeal from the EAT to the Court of Appeal: -

***
**37 Appeals from the Appeal Tribunal**
(1) Subject to subsection (3), an appeal on any question of law lies to from any decision or order of the Appeal Tribunal to the relevant appeal court with leave of the Appeal Tribunal or the relevant appeal court.
*** 

So - here we have Mr Kaneria needing to show that his gripe with the Arbitral Panel fell within the concept of “an error of law arising out of an award”[^23]. What were his arguments? These fell within two broad areas: a proportionality argument, based on the inconsistency of Mr Kaneria’s life time ban compared with Mr Whitfield’s penalty, and similar penalties imposed on other examples of spot -fixing, and an argument that the Arbitral panel exceeded its powers in both imposing a life time ban and the imposition of the costs order.[^24]

Leaving Mr Kaneria’s argument hanging in the air it is now time to examine the pre-history of the law vs fact dichotomy, and how it has informed the topic of appeals from the employment tribunal.

Going back a bit, arbitration has a remarkably long history as a means of dispute resolution.  Ironically, given that two significant institutions with employment law use the title “Arbitration” in their names – the Central Arbitration Committee and the Advisory Conciliation Service – for the majority of employment lawyers the subject is something of a novelty.  However, every now and then the substantive law of arbitration impacts on employment issues.  Technically, parties in dispute can arbitrate anything they like – if they agree to give the arbitrator appropriate powers, and once an arbitrator publishes an award it becomes as enforceable as any other judgment of the civil courts.  It is even possible to give an arbitrator the powers to grant specific performance or make injunctions.  Arbitration is, however, a private process arbitrator awards are not a public document.  Because of this the use of, for example, arbitration in high paid directors’ service agreements as a means of dispute resolution may not necessarily be readily observable.

Certainly, in terms of contractual rights arising out of the contract of employment there is nothing to stop the parties using arbitration as a system to resolve those issues.  There is no provision, for example, that stops the parties entering into an arbitration agreement to resolve their contractual disputes – in other words there is nothing analogous to Section 203 of the Employment Rights Act 1996 governing contractual rights covered by the Employment Tribunals Extension of Jurisdiction (England and Wales) Order 1994 SI 1994/1623, or its Scottish equivalent.  And, indeed, there are even “arbitration” cases in the ICRs.  The Court of Appeal allowed a Defendant company’s appeal against a refusal to stay arbitration in a wrongful dismissal claim, the Court exercising its powers to stay the proceedings to allow arbitration – at the time those powers are contained in Section 4 of the 1950 Arbitration Act: similar provisions exist in the 1996 Act. 

The conjunction between employment and arbitration does sometimes become more public: whilst the Bates Van Winkelhof  case is perhaps best known now for its extension of the categories of protection offered to whistleblowers to include members of LLPs, at an early stage the question of whether or not the dispute,  involving as it did sex discrimination,  could be stayed to arbitration was live.  In Clyde & Co LLP v Bates Van Winkelhof [2011] IRLR 467 Slade J refused to grant an order that would have stayed tribunal proceedings until the alternative arbitration provisions in the LLP membership agreement had been worked through.  Slade J found the ADR provisions in the membership agreement to be unenforceable in the light of both Sections 203 and Section 144 of the 2010 Equality Act. [^25]

The real issue, in my view, when it comes to comparing arbitration and employment is the difference in input that stakeholders who use the arbitration system had in deciding the level of error that would be needed to engage the appeal process.  Of course, the average arbitration user will often be very well financially resourced, and specifically will chosen arbitration as a medium of dispute resolution,  for privacy (sometimes), for certain powers an arbitrator can be granted that may be unavailable to a Judge, and also in the belief that arbitration can keep alive a commercial relationship in a way that litigation cannot. 

It should also be noted that arbitration is well developed in the US as a means of the resolution of employment disputes. [^26]

Although the basic concept of appeal on a point of law is common to arbitration and employment, certain aspect of the control of an employment tribunal by the EAT are not covered by section 69 of the Arbitration Act 1996. As Lord Thomas LCJ explained in his Bailii Lecture, just how the courts should interfere in the essential private process of arbitration has been much debated. England and Wales (but not Scotland) did not in fact incorporate an international instrument, the UNCITRAL Model Law, in part because of arguments over the correct balance of reviewing powers to be given to national courts. Originally, under the Arbitration Act 1950, there was no appeal on law, but the arbitrator was obliged to use the Case Stated process, where it was the arbitrator,  at the behest of the parties, who had to formulate a question of law for the court to consider. The process was abolished by the Arbitration Act 1979, but quite what the new Act had introduced to replace the Cases Stated process was not entirely clear. An element of controversy existed as to what approach should be adopted by the courts on the question of an appeal. The Court of Appeal, under Lord Denning MR, took a restrictive approach in the Nema[^27]. Lord Denning’s approach was affirmed by the House of Lords.[^28] The Guidelines from the Nema became the basis for section 69 in the 1996 Act, following recommendations from a Departmental Committee chaired in turn by Lords Mustill, Steyn and Saville.

However, although the number of appeals under section 69 is tiny, that is not quite the end of the story as far as the judicial review of arbitration is concerned. In fact, certain issues that would give rise to section 21 of the Employment Tribunals Act 1996 becoming engaged are not dealt with by section 69, but by section 67 and 68.

Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party to arbitrary proceedings made (upon notice to the other parties and to the Tribunal) appeal to the Court on a question of law arising out of an award made in the proceedings.  An agreement to dispense with the reasons for the Tribunal’s award shall be considered an agreement to exclude the Court’s jurisdiction.

Firstly, let’s consider section 69 a little bit further.  Section 69(1) is as follows: -

What that means is, is that unlike the Employment Tribunal if the parties want to, they can agree to exclude any appeal for error of law at all.   This may not be quite so extreme as it sounds: it certainly reflects the desire by commercial parties for a binding resolution of their dispute which will not be unpicked by the court.  However, even where the right to appeal isn’t excluded then,  unlike the Employment Tribunals Act,  the Arbitration Act goes further in setting out a framework for when appeals will be permitted.  Section 69(3) says:

> Leave to appeal shall be given only if the Court is satisfied - (a) that the determination of the question will substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties, (b) that the question is one which the tribunal was asked to determine, (c) that, on the basis of the findings in the award - (i) the decision of the tribunal on the question is obviously wrong, or (ii) the question is one of general public importance and the decision of the tribunal is at least open to serious doubt, and (d) that, despite the agreement of the parties to resolve the matter by arbitration, it is just and proper in all the circumstances for the court to determine the question.

I suspect that the reality here is that, consciously or subconsciously, some of the issues articulated in 69(3) (c) and (d) will be the same as those that inform a decision at the sift level in the EAT, in taking decisions as to whether or not to commit matters to go forward to a full hearing. 

All that said, though, even though the parties can contract out of appeals based on error of law, there are mandatory provisions under the Arbitration Act which can also give rise to judicial review.  Section 67 of the Act permits a challenge to substantive jurisdiction of the Arbitrator.  For example, if there was no arbitration agreement, or if the arbitration agreement did not permit a particular person to sit as an Arbitrator, then a challenge will lie to the Court.  Equally, under section 68 of the Act, there is a concept known as “serious irregularity affecting the Tribunal”.  In reality, “serious irregularity” under section 68 has similarities both to the challenge to an administrative decision on the basis of the breach of natural justice, and also to those challenges to legality of a tribunal decision where it is alleged that, for example, a decision is tainted by bias, or, again, the rules of natural justice have not been observed.

A recent decision considering the scope of section 68 was RJ (1) and L Ltd (2) v. HB [2018] EWHC 2833 (Comm).  According to the Law Report, HB and RJ are wealthy individuals: L Ltd was a corporate vehicle of RJ’s.  In November 2013 RJ had been introduced to HB as a potential investor: the pair agreed in principal that RJ would provide US$75million in cash through L Ltd. to enable HB to acquire a controlling interest in a bank.  RJ would then, ultimately, get a minority interest in that bank once a merger had been completed.  Because of regulatory compliance more conventional borrowing could not fund the arrangement.  There then followed a series of transactions: HB’s case was that a share transfer of 25% of the bank had not occurred. Consequently, in the arbitration HB alleged that RJ and/or L Ltd. were in breach of an obligation to obtain or to seek to obtain the appropriate authorisation allowing the transfer.  The Arbitrator in an award gave a declaration that RJ was the beneficial owner of shares in the bank purchased with his US$75million.  RJ and L then sought an order from the Court setting aside the award on the basis that the award was affected by a serious irregularity.  The basis behind the challenge was that the Arbitrator had granted relief that HB had never sought and had done so without notice to the parties who were thus deprived from addressing the Arbitrator on the issue.  The application was heard by Andrew Baker J who held that deciding the case in a way which had not given the parties proper opportunity to comment was a breach of the Arbitrator’s duty of fairness.  Moreover, that lack of fairness had subjected RJ to a substantial injustice and the award would be set aside.

A rare example of section 69 challenge was NYK Bulkship (Atlantic) NV v Cargill International SA [2016] UK SC 20.    NYK had chartered a vessel to Cargill to carry cement from Sweden to Nigeria.  The chartered party contained a “off hire” clause.  This meant that if the ship were ever captured, seized, detained or arrested payment for the hire would be suspended, but if the circumstances were caused by a “personal act or omission or default of Cargill or their agents NYK could be reimbursed.  The ship was mistakenly arrested. Following an Arbitrator’s award, there was an appeal to Field J.  Field J held that the cement buyer was Cargill’s agent, and therefore they were liable to NYK for subsequent losses.   Following a further appeal to the Court of Appeal the question of the true construction of the term “agent” went to the Supreme Court.  In the Supreme Court Lord Sumption held that the cement buyer was not exercising any of Cargill’s rights or obligations and therefore did not constitute an “agent” within the meaning of the “off hire” clause.   The Supreme Court set aside the Orders of both Courts and upheld the original arbitral award.

## CONCLUSIONS

Back in the 1980s Gwyneth Pitt gave a masterly exhibition of the problem of errors of law as it affected the definition of employee status at the time. [^29]  Gwyneth Pitt was writing in the context of cases such as O Kelly v. Trusthouse Forte Plc[^30], which rather improbably and have found the group of kitchen staff to be “self-employed”.   Because the question was essentially one of fact, no challenge was possible.  Again, going back to Edwards v. Bairstow, Gwyneth Pitt came to the conclusion that: -

> The classification of these issues [law v. fact] in our system proceeds really a posteriori by having an eye to the consequences.  That is, if an issue is designated a question of law then appeal is possible, if it is designated as fact it is not.   If it is designated a question of degree (or mixed fact of law) whereas either it may be justified and essentially treated as a question of fact in that appeal is not possible. So what we are really talking about is not an analytical question as to what the law is and what is fact but a policy question as to whether it is desirable to allow an appeal or not.  If one were being cynical one might add, and this policy decision by the appellate courts are sometimes concealed behind a smoke screen of apparent scientific analysis.

That, of course, is exactly the point acknowledged in Lawson v. Serco.  Administrative law and employment law have enjoyed an interchange of concepts: in importing Lawson v Serco into administrative law the matters have come full circle with the same line of cases now being reviewed in British Council v. David Jeffery [2018] EWCA Civ 2253.  Should Jeffery go further to the Supreme Court, perhaps the Supreme Court could confirm whether in Lord Hoffman’s views in Lawson are more than just a passing comment but are now the real determinant of a question of law.  In short: should the future be one where the EAT is given back its function as a Tribunal giving guidance, and the power to intervene whenever an ET’s decision is “wrong” and where its decision deserve special respect from the Court of Appeal?

[^1]: In Phoenix House Limited v Tatiana Stockman UKEAT /0284/17

[^2]: Employment Appeal Tribunal Practice in Relation to Familiar Authorities (2016), re-issued 17th March 2016

[^3]: By a happy co-incidence for present purposes, whilst at the bar Patrick Garland QC had been an expert in the law of arbitration as applied in building disputes. I think it unlikely he would ever have ventured into what was then called the Industrial Tribunal.

[^4]: [1976] 1 ITR 70 (HC). If you’ve never come across the Industrial Tribunal Reports these were small, green A5 booklets, long ago succeeded by the Industrial Case Reports and the Industrial Relations Law Reports

[^5]: [1990] IRLR 29, 30 para 31.

[^6]: Some Notes on the Employment Appeal Tribunal (1978) 7 ILJ 137

[^7]: Succeeded, of course by Section 57(3) of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 and now found in section 98(4) of the Employment Rights Act 1996

[^8]: The representatives here are not the advocates for the appellant and respondent but, as Phillips J makes clear in his description of the EAT’s composition, the lay members (as they were then called).

[^9]: (1978) ILJ 137, 140. Interesting, from the article it would appear that the EAT at the time sometimes sat with up to 4 lay members.

[^10]: [1956] A.C 14

[^11]: [1955] 3 All ER 48 at 58

[^12]: Op Cit, fn 4

[^13]:(1982) 11 I.L.J. 69, 75.

[^14]: [1978] I.C.R 437

[^15]: [1980] I.C.R 642

[^16]: But if as Browne-Wilkinson J pointed out, if the EAT was not there to give guidance then what was it doing in Burchell? The latter pre-dated both Day and Bailey: its authority rests on Weddel v. Tepper [1980] I.C.R 286, a case in which neither of these cases was cited, see (1982) 11 I.L.J.69, 75 

[^17]: [2011] IRLR 414, 417 para 30.31

[^18]: [2002] IRLR 395

[^19]: [2013] UKSC 19

[^20]: [2015] UKSC 37

[^21]: Halifax v HM Customs and Excise (C-255/02) http://curia.europa.eu/juris/showPdf.jsf;jsessionid=069A08645E5305F52500A0203EF55C99?text=&docid=56198&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=5535317

[^22]: [2014] EWCH 1348

[^23]: Eagle eyed employment lawyers will have already noted the difference in the terminology in as much as an employment tribunal’s error must “arise from any decision” rather than “arise out of the award”

[^24]: Technically, the argument that the Arbitral panel exceeded its powers was made under the provisions of section 68, not 69, of the Arbitration Act. I will return to the distinction between the two sections later.

[^25]: This may not necessarily be right.  The Courts have a positive attitude to what are sometimes referred to as multi dispute resolution clauses, see Emirates Trading Agency LLC v Prime Mineral Exports Private Ltd [2014] EWHC 2104(COMM)

[^26]: Not necessarily without some controversy, see the article in 84 Arbitration 335, Epic Clash Between Elephants and Yellow Dogs : US Supreme Court Upholds Enforceability of Employment
Contracts that Provide for Individualised Arbitration  Stephen P Caplow, commenting on Epic Systems Corp v Lewis 138 S Ct 612 (2018) (21 May 2018)

[^27]: BTP Tioxide Ltd. v. Pioneer Shipping [1980] QB 547

[^28]: Pioneer Shipping Ltd v BTP Tioxide Ltd (The Nema) (No 2) [1982] A>C. 724

[^29]: Law Fact and Casual Workers 101 LQR 217.

[^30]: [1984] QB90