+++
date = '2019-05-30T00:00:00+00:00'
title = 'Necessary Myths'
description = 'Europe, Britain, and Brexit: necessary myths or making myths out of necessity, and what should we really learn from history?'
+++

## Europe, Britain, and Brexit: necessary myths or making myths out of necessity, and what should we really learn from history?

> Antagonisms, misconceptions, political fighting of all sorts, religious passion and hatred in a Europe which was taking shape for more than 1000 years after barbaric invasions, have hidden or misinterpreted truths and transparent situations, political realities and institutional cross fertilizations and so on. Europe is, however, finally united again, through the European Union and the 28 nations which compose it today.
> - Spyridion Flogaitis, The Evolution of Law and the State in Europe. 2014

> With the aim of ensuring the proper functioning of the single customs territory, the Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure that the level of protection provided for by the law , regulation and practices is not reduced below the level provided by the common standards applicable within the Union and the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period in the area of labour and social protection and as regards fundamental rights at work, occupational health and safety, fair working conditions  and employment standards, information and consultation rights at company level, and restructuring.
> - Draft Agreement on the Withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Authority, Annex 4 Part III Article 4(1).

> …it is possible that you are right and I am wrong.
> - David Davis, letter of Resignation, 8th July 2018 

Physically throwing people out of windows is generally frowned on these days, even as a means of asserting autonomy and sovereignty, but anyone strolling outside Prague Castle on the 23rd May 1618 might have noticed three bodies falling from a third-floor window – first two, and then a third, with their cloaks fluttering in the wind, accompanied by the jeers of assailants and their own cries and invocations. The event, now known as the Defenestration of Prague, led to the Thirty Years’ War: surprisingly, in terms of per capita death rates, Europe’s worst war, even when twentieth century conflicts are included in the tally. And by a nice irony the 23rd May 2019 was also to be the date of the European elections – elections that probably no one in Britain expected to be taking part in a year ago, where in our subtler times, autonomy and sovereignty have been asserted by a less messy but no less dramatic process of a referendum to leave the European Union. The 400th anniversary of the Defenestration of Prague passed without much comment in this country: 401 years on the European elections have shown the UK has become a bitterly divided and fractious country, its political concepts and institutions, many of which trace their origins to the seventeenth century, lost in a fog of inaccurate and often self-serving rhetoric.  

The four hundredth anniversary of Defenestration and the start of the Thirty Years’ War passed without much referencing here. We choose what we remember of history carefully: even the three hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the execution of Charles I slipped by without notice. Given we were on the winning side in 1918 the hundredth anniversary of the end of that war was prominent in the public consciousness of history, but 2019’s anniversaries have an ambiguity to them that makes remembering tendentious. What is the right response, for example, to Peterloo, or the Amritsar massacre?

However, whether intentionally or co-incidentally, the 400th anniversary of the Defenestration was chosen for two detailed analyses of  aspects of Britain’s European withdrawal to be made public: Sir Ivan Rogers’ penetrating explanation, The Real Post -Brexit Options, given at a lecture at Glasgow University, and the House of Commons Library  Briefing Paper No. 08275 by Graham Cowie. The latter looked at potentially difficult questions of the mandate for leaving in those component parts of the United Kingdom whose democratic rights as represented by the 2016 referendum result were to remain, not leave – North Ireland and Scotland.

Back in June 2016 leaving the European Union seemed simple – or so it was portrayed.  Flushed with her success in the Conservative party’s leadership elections Teresa May promised a Great Repeal Bill, “red lines” she would not cross, and an assumption she could trigger Article 50 by using prerogative powers.  

Well, with Miller, firstly in the Divisional Court[^1], and then in the Supreme Court[^2] suddenly all that constitutional law, and all those forgotten seventeenth century clashes between King and Parliament, the role of the Speaker and those Parliaments with curious names like the ”the Useless Parliament”, the Rump Parliament” and the “Barebones Parliament” began to seem less like historical curiosities and more like historical prophesies.  True, Parliament rather meekly obliged the executive by duly passing the European Union  (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017 but after Miller and then a disastrous general election Brexit started to look a little less simple, and the Prime Minister came to resemble not a Churchillian leader  but a modern analogue for an embattled Stuart monarch.

For some politicians, political rhetoric is the substitute of choice for more conventional comfort blankets. For something as complex as the relationship between Britain and the EU, developed over a forty-year period of mutual dependence and benefit, fuzzy nostalgia and comfort blankets were  not the right analytical tools: giving the electorate a clear understanding and analysis of what we are leaving and what the post EU landscape is (or was?)  to be – what we are heading for and why – should have been the necessary precondition for trust in Parliament and trust of the executive.   Redlines and gnomic utterance may be fun to mutter but do they really support the assertion that the referendum result has any democratic currency? 

Britain’s democratic traditions, or their foundations at least, emerged in the same century that saw the Defenestration of Prague. That same century would see the rise and fall of theocratic government in Scotland, and what is inaccurately referred to as the English Civil War. There is a notion that Britain was unaffected by the war that swept Europe. In contrast to the brutality of the European conflict we had a civil war, with the emphasis on the “civil”, a war that at least established Parliamentary democracy rather than absolute monarchy. Such notions are wrong on more or less every count. In the early stages of the war Scottish troops, fired by Calvinist zeal, flocked to the standard of Gustavus IV Adolphus of Sweden. Periodically, subscriptions were raised in England to provide material support for Frederick V, Elector of Palatine, in his attempts to regain his territories from the Emperor. Fredrick’s son (and Charles’ nephew) Prince Rupert was part of the Anglo German force that besieged the town of Rheinberg in 1633. Prince Rupert’s later capture by Imperial forces lead to the Prince leaving the mainland for England, where he proved to be the most able of the Royalist generals during our own war. [^3]

But back to that cold spring morning in Prague. “Control” was a feature that prompted the violence of the Defenestration. The Czech protestant aristocracy was articulating demands to control its own sovereignty, free from their Catholic overlord, the Holy Roman Emperor, Matthias. Matthias himself wasn’t the object of fear: Matthias, like his brother Rudolf before him, had confirmed the right to (princely) religious freedoms deriving from the Peace of Augsburg signed into imperial law more than 60 years earlier. But Matthias was ailing, and his likely successor (even though the imperial crown was won by election, not inheritance) was his son, Ferdinand, already King of Bohemia and militantly anti-protestant, whatever had been the tolerant beliefs of his uncles. Both Rudolf and Matthias had granted a document called the Letter of Majesty to the Czech nobility, effectively a confirmation of their entitlement to a degree of autonomy from imperial edicts and the imperial catholic religion, but fears of the revocation the Letter once Ferdinand had succeeded to the imperial crown began to spread amongst the Czech aristocracy.

Opposition focussed around Count Thurn, who had been deprived of his role as castellan of Karlstadt Castle to the Catholic hardliner, Jaroslav Martinitz, one of the Regents who now sat huddled in his clock in the Castle. Thurn decided he had to strike pre-emptively. Then as now history – sometimes mythologised history – motivated and justified action. Just under two hundred years earlier, on the 30th July 1419 Hussite militants[^4] had thrown the mayor and seven councillors to their deaths from Prague town hall[^5].

After singing protestant hymns Count Thurn headed for the Castle accompanied by other conspirators to confront the imperial Regents. Bursting in on the Regents in their third-floor room they found only four of them plus the Regents’ secretary Fabricius. Two Regents, Adam Von Sternberg and Diepold Von Lobkovitz, denied any intention to undermine the rights granted by the Letter of Majesty, but among the remaining Regents was Thurn’s rival and now castellan, Jaroslav Martinitz, together with Vilem Slavata. Thurn wanted one thing and one thing alone, whatever his co-conspirators might have thought they were going to do that day: a defenestration to precipitate a revolt against the emperor, and he got his way. First Martinitz and Slavata, and then Fabricius, were bundled headfirst from the window. As he was hurled to his fate Martinitz called on the Virgin Mary for protection… and miraculously all three survived. Such a survival in the face of certain death was an ill omen for the start of a rebellion, although the rational explanation for the survival of the Regents is based on Thurn’s haste in bundling them from the window: he failed to remove their cloaks which acted as elementary parachutes slowing their descent. Later, the protestant propaganda machine would spread a different myth: all three had had their fall broken by landing in a dung cart, although this detail is absent from the contemporaneous accounts, and only gained widespread currency two centuries later when Friederich Schiller included it as fact in his Geschicte des Dreißigjähren Krieges.

Whatever happened on that day there can be no doubt as to the consequences: 30 years of destructive conflict, now known, not surprisingly, as the Thirty Years War. Throwing imperial regents may well have seen as simple to Count Thurn as red lines once seemed to Teresa May: both were to be disabused by the reality of the events that followed “taking back control”.

The Thirty Years’ War took an extraordinary toll, but the one thing it did not achieve was to kill off the Holy Roman Empire. However blood soaked Europe had become, the resolution of the conflict was a triumph of diplomacy and negotiations, not force of arms. Out of conflict and cruelty was born a new European order. Sickened with religious conflict, the seeds of future ideas of toleration and equality were planted, even if it would take centuries – and yet more war – for these ideas to emerge in their modern form. The diplomats and negotiators that ended the war did not just achieve peace but brought into being modern ideas of the nation state, governed by and through laws. The treaty that ended the conflict – the Treaty of Westphalia[^6] - has been viewed, by some historians as[^7]:

> …the birth of the modern international order based on sovereign states interacting (formally) as equals within a common secularized legal framework, regardless of size, power, or internal configuration. The classic ‘Westphalian State’ rests on indivisible sovereignty that both excludes external agencies and does not share the exercise of internal governance with other domestic bodies. In addition, it possesses well-demarcated, non-porous borders, and a common identity and culture among its inhabitants.[^8]

And Europe changed as a result of the war and the Treaty. Looked at as a continuum, the Prague Defenestration followed by the Thirty Years War ended the Middle Ages, and irrevocably destroyed the concept of “Christendom” but in so doing (re)created Europe. The drafters of the Treaty intended a new start in international treaty making, and in so doing understood international law to be a voluntary contract between states, but one that was superior to all existing secular and religious law, even as those very states maintained, and indeed enhanced, their own The medieval fiction of Christendom – that Europe was one state with one Emperor and one Pope – had always been an expression of hope, not reality, and after Westphalia the notion disappeared even as an ideal. In a Europe of nation states there was no room for Christendom: religion was on its way to becoming an optional extra in society, and it is not surprising that the only party to the negotiations who refused to sign the Treaty was the Pope, Innocent X[^9].

Article I of both the IPO and the IPM promised a new start and permanent peace and friendship across the continent. Tragically that was an idea well ahead of its time, and it has taken another three hundred years of conflict until a further Treaty, the Treaty of Rome, finally banished war from Europe – or at least from those states that are members of the EU.[^10]  The negotiators in Westphalia had a particular advantage over those currently charged with negotiating Britain’s withdrawal treaty. Back in 1648 all the negotiators knew what they wanted – peace. Equally though, all sides still had armies in the field and even after thirty years of war all sides still had means to continue the conflict. The Swedes in particular had formidable forces in the field in both Bohemia and Germany and were not afraid to use them. Having a common aim and a clear alternative to success concentrates the mind.

Contrast that with what can only be described by even the most generous and kindly commentators as amateurish attempts to negotiate an exit from the EU. What sort of exit is or was mandated by the Referendum? Little thought was given to the options, quite possibly because the Referendum wasn’t about leaving the EU: for many it was an opportunity to attack what was perceived as an uncaring ruling elite, and in proposing it David Cameron’s aims had more to do with preventing Conservative party schisms than in a belief the Britain would ever leave, or that EEA/ EFTA rules or some other variant might be arguably suit Britain’s interests more than EU membership.

But as the fires of the Thirty Years’ War were finally being quenched by the negotiators of Westphalia, conflict had already flared again in the British Isles. Scotland, England and Ireland all had separate but interconnected conflicts, starting with the Bishop’s War of 1639- 1640. War recommenced between Scotland and England in a second period of war from 1648 – 1649, and then between Ireland and England from 1649 to 1651. Far from being a “civil” conflict, massacres – of prisoners, and of women and children - were perpetrated by both sides. The massacre by troops under Cromwell’s commanded of up to 3,500, including civilians, after the siege of Drogheda, is well known but unfortunately not unique, and certainly not the only massacre of civilians. After the battle of Philiphaugh, in 1645, women and children were massacred by a Covenanting army to the cry of “Jesus, and no quarter.”

Nor is deciding when the constitutional issues that generated war were finally resolved easy. England had begun the seventeenth century under the rule of one woman and would end it as a new nation - the United Kingdom – under another. But in between neither the execution of Charles I, the ending of the Protectorate, or the Restoration in 1660 were end points in the struggle between executive power, Parliament, and religious freedom. Stability was only partially reached by a large dose of European ideas, imported – forcibly – by the Dutch in 1688. The Glorious Revolution of 1688 was more a Glorious Invasion: over 20,000 Dutch troops –under the command of Friedrich Herman von Schönberg, Duke of Schomberg - ensured that the accession of William of Orange as William III was unopposed, military might being a more convincing form of persuasion than selling a newly imported regime to the populace. After all, Britain’s new King was also the Stadtholder of a nation that had already fought three wars against it before 1688. The two Protestant republics first clashed in 1652 – 1654. Then following the Restoration hostilities resumed in 1665 – 1667, leading to disastrous losses for England as the Dutch navy raised the Medway ports and came away with the capture of the English ships Unity and Royal Charles. The third Anglo Dutch war of 1672 – 1674 saw a reversal of Dutch gains (with Prince Rupert now an admiral), as Charles II allied with Louis XIV through the secret Treaty of Dover, although Louis’ inability to inflict a decisive blow led to Parliament curtailing hostilities.

Indeed, much of what we think of as archetypically “British” - in terms of representative democracy, parliamentary sovereignty, and the rule of law – owes as much to Dutch influence as to home grown notions. But even in the British Isles the Dutch take-over was not all smooth going. The loose ends of conflict were still festering in 1690 when the deposed James II tried to regain power, leading to his defeat at the Boyne by Dutch and Danish troops. Once again William had the faithful Duke of Schomberg at his side, although the Duke’s loyalty was rewarded with death in battle. And the Boyne is a paradigm of how reality can be re-packaged by and for subsequent generations: the battle was an opener in the War of the League of Augsburg, and at the time overshadowed by the naval defeat suffered by Britain at the hands of the French during the battle of Beachy Head. But whilst in Ireland the battle has been seen as one motivated by religious conflict it should be recalled that William was allied to Pope Alexander VIII, the Pope having no more desire to see French hegemony in Europe than did William, or, for that matter, the Holy Roman Emperor. And it wasn’t even on the 12th July: it was fought on the 1st July according to the Julian calendar, but as Catholic astronomers had corrected the Julian calendar’s inaccuracies England did not feel able to adopt the new Gregorian dating until the eighteenth century. The idea of the Boyne being a defining conflict in the identity of a separate Protestant North was then promoted in the nineteenth century, after the bloody suppression of the (protestant) Wolfe Tone’s uprising of the United Irishmen in 1798. And into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries English politicians such as Carson, Smith and Churchill continued to fan the flames of sectarianism, often for strategic reasons, into the twentieth century. Those flames were only quenched by the Good Friday Agreement, a treaty that could not have come into being without the EU.

But isn’t all the current pain going to be worth it in the end – because we can go back to what we are good at without Brussels interference – international trade? Shortly after the Referendum the Department of International Trade, under Dr Liam Fox, published a helpful blueprint to explain our new trading partners[^11].   The front cover shows a dramatic representation of all the possible new markets awaiting Britain, with arcing lines connecting us to our “new” trading partners, suggesting that there is much trade to be done in the middle of the Indian Ocean. The excitement at future trade with Oceania is tempered by the last page of the command paper: the picture credits confirm that the front cover is not emblematic of our future trading partners, but actually shows world flight paths: the lines ending in the Indian Ocean simply show flights to the Seychelles and other idyllic holiday spots, the sort of place that Britain’s current prosperity has made accessible, even common place, but may regain their air of mystery and exoticism they should Brexit cause the decline in the economy that many fear.

As well as the assumption that it was love of free trade that was the first thought of Brexiters in the Referendum, the Government’s negotiations seem predicated on the basis that however duplicitous the Brussels bureaucrats are, in their heart of hearts they want to offer us a deal encompassing all the good bits of staying in the EU, with none of those tedious burdens of responsibility and reciprocity that comes with membership. As a tip, along the lines of sage historical advice like “never start a land war in central Asia” the Government might do better to reverse their approach in negotiating: assume that whatever EU offer, it is never going to be as good as staying in. The EU is not going to oblige the UK by bidding against itself, if only as a matter of simple common sense. The Government, instead of trying to negotiate with the EU (which is hardly fair, given that we lack negotiators anyway), should perhaps spend its energies explaining to the electorate why they can expect a decline in their material prosperity for the next ten years or so (at least) while industry and services leave the UK for EU states. The Government would then have the time to further explain that the Brexit dividend is a rhetorical, metaphorical, spiritual dividend, not a crass material one: the benefit of being free to legislate for new laws.  

Sir Ivan Rogers has remarked:

> But the Luxembourg PM, Xavier Bettel’s pithy description is a pretty good one: “Before they (the British) were in with a lot of opt-outs; now they are out and want a lot of opt-ins”.
> Michel Barnier has likewise expressed surprise that so many of the UK documents read like ones from a state aspiring to accede to the EU, not one intending to leave it. I confess I slightly share the puzzlement. So many of the positions in these documents read a good deal more enthusiastic about the case for remaining closely aligned to EU policy than most of the instructions I ever received from Departments when negotiating over years on their behalf in Brussels!”

Putting aside the obvious issues like implanting Directives into our domestic law the mere fact that over forty years of alignment with Europe means any break will not be clear, or swift - or that the consequences will be discernible in the short term. In addition, as well as the EU itself there are legions of agreements that previously have come with membership: what is to happen to them?

From an employment law context, the irony is that this is one field of activity where rights similar to or even identical to those on offer in the EU may remain the norm is in discrimination law. That was certainly clear from alignments created by the Chequers agreement and in its weakened iterations. Pre-referendum there was much talk of EU red-tape tying up business, and certainly those on the right made it clear they were no friend of legislation that did things like give workers a right to paid holidays, or rights in the event of a business transfer, still less freedom from discrimination or inequality of pay. But once free from the EU “European” style rights will lose any special status and be capable of repeal at the whim of Parliament. The rhetoric at least from the May administration was that no change was contemplated: “alignment” of UK law to European law was not only on offer but was to be the norm as far as our laws were concerned for the indefinite future. Why? Because the EU are in a position to seek alignment as part of any trade deal: not to seek alignment, from the EU’s perspective would be to encourage the development of the UK as an offshore haven for cheap labour.

Is being an offshore free from the inconveniences of workers’ rights what most of the pro leave voters sought on the 23rd June 2016? Teresa May can at least claim credit for introducing, as Home Secretary, the Modern Slavery Act 2015. This statue brings into UK law concepts from an extra territorial source – in this case the International Labour Organisation’s Protocol on Forced or Compulsory Labour – without any requirement to do so by virtue of EU membership.  That any British government would accept principles from the ILO might come as surprising: the adoption of ideas from the ILO has in previous administration not been a matter of high priority. But here we have a British, Conservative, administration following the example of Niger and Norway and signing up to the Protocol. The legislation was both needed and welcomed: but is it any different to agree to follow ILO protocols than the EU Social Chapter?

Whatever the shortcomings of laws derived from the EU – and even the most passionate Remainer would have to acknowledge some, especially in the fine details – with the UK as a member we were able to determine the scope of those laws: not so in the future. “Take back Control” suggest that the UK will, eventually, determine its own employment and other laws. But in seeking alignment without membership the UK was offering to renounce control in return for an immigration cap – or at least a cap on immigration from the EU. Whilst in the EU the UK can, for example, get opt-outs on certain provision of the Working Time Directive. But regulatory alignment - even with immigration control - means that we simple must accept those rules made by EU institutions without the possibility of even influencing such laws- an unusual way to “take back control”.

The enormous task of unravelling forty years’ or so of law and regulation across all areas of human activity, not just the employment sphere, (and there are some 12,000 EU regulations and 600 EU Directives to consider) may at the very least mean there is little time left over to think about extending or modifying employment rights – or much of anything else - for years to come. And once again the problems come about from the fact that the EU has provided an effective mechanism for legislating, particularly where member states have sought conformity with international standards – vital if problems such as global warming are to be combatted and far, far more effective than trying to address problems through a myriad of each nation states’ own laws. Here the reality is again very far from the myth of a moribund bureaucracy that some would say the EU was and is.

Take for example greenhouse gasses. If you want to export, your exports must conform to the Montreal Protocol – a United Nations’ instrument that has successfully tackled the problem of fluorocarbons destroying the ozone layer. No conformity with the Montreal Protocol and a nation cannot export to another nation – it’s that simple. So how does the UK comply with the Protocol? Through the catchily entitled Fluorinated Greenhouses Gases (Fluorinated Gasses) Regulations (European Union) Regulations SI No 517 /2014. That statutory instrument comes about through the exercise of powers granted under the European Communities Act 1972. No Act, no exports – until a new legislative framework is in place.

Another example is given by air safety: in the EU we can rely on certification through participation in the European Air Safety Authority, which has developed powers as yet unavailable to the Civil Aviation Authority. These are just two examples: remember there are 12,000 EU regulations and 6000 Directives to consider, and that is even without considering the vexed question of Northern Ireland.

Faced with all that perhaps one can be forgiven for dashing back to the simplicities of the seventeenth century.

The previous century had already been one attempt at a resolution of differing of religious factions: the 1555 Peace of Augsburg had determined that the secular ruler of a state could determine the religion of his subjects, as long as that religion was either Catholicism or Lutheranism: cuius regio, eius religio. In 1555 Calvinist were still out in the cold, although just as adept at demonstrating religious bigotry as their rivals, as witness the burning at the stake of the anti-Trinitarian Servetus in Geneva. After 1555 there had been much in the way of mission creep by both sides: a secular ruler would confiscate monastic lands: a prince bishop would annex the territories of a Lutheran town. Thus the negotiators were faced with unravelling not 40 years of laws and regulations but nearly a hundred years of trying to work who was entitled to what. The method adopted was to argue over but finally choose a “normative date” – 1st January 1624. This meant that property rights were restored as they had been on that date. Further, instead of religion being the prerogative of princes, it now became a matter of conscience – at least for Catholics, Lutherans, and now Calvinists communities, as opposed to individuals. Beyond those confessions, glimmerings of a broader religious freedom began to shine. In part this was pragmatic: the depopulations within central Europe were so great rulers welcomed any settlers to some areas, even if they did not conform – and in some cases even if they were Jewish.[^12]

In our own time we were to have a new normative date: 29th March 2019. This was the date the UK was due to exit the European Union. When will we leave? 31st October? Or some other date? From a lawyer’s perspective whatever the date is critical, if the approach currently advocated continues: EU law up to that date will be preserved by statute, just like the normative date fixed property rights in the different confessions of the Holy Roman Empire.

But before counting the profit from our new trading partners after the new normative date  a little research may be helpful. HMRC publish the data for UK trade[^13] but what is needed is a comparative approach: statistics are available via the World Bank from the World Integrated Trade Systems, (WITS)[^14].   The statistics may be complex, but the underlying issues are straight forward: EU membership facilitates trade with our biggest trading partner: the EU. Further, nothing in the membership of the EU stops the UK being open for world business outside the EU now. Look at Germany’s record of exporting worldwide. So: leaving the EU represents a cost to business and the consumer which will lead to a loss of profit, a rise in prices and a fall in tax revenue. How long is an open question, but even if the period of economic under performance lasted a modest five years that has serious consequences which could have the populace yearning for the standard of living enjoyed in 2008.  The UK does very well, in terms of trade, with, for example, the USA. Whatever EU rules are doing, they don’t seem to inhibit British goods or services being bought by US dollars. If that does raise a bat squeak of a doubt perhaps it should do: suppose, instead of the rhetoric, the reality is that EU membership actually facilitates our worldwide trade, not inhibits it, what is going to replace the trade with the EU that we will lose after Brexit? If we are already trading with her rest of world are there really that many unexploited markets to develop in future?

Finally, on the trade front, anyone who thinks international trade is rule free compared to trade in the EU had better reconsider their position. Modern international trade has its origins in an unsigned memorandum between Churchill and Roosevelt, the pair meeting at the height of the Battle of the Atlantic, on the HMS Prince of Wales, off the coast of Canada. At the time the USA was neutral: Roosevelt travelled north in secret on board the presidential yacht, the Potomac. The American President had clear objective in mind: expanding free trade by persuading Churchill to dump the Ottawa Imperial Preference System of 1932, a system of tariffs that had been designed by Britain to favour its then imperial possessions. Both had been witness to the damage cause by the tariff wars of the 1930s. And both Churchill and Roosevelt had an eye on the post war world, although their deliberation here were to be eclipsed both in reality and in the public mind by the Yalta conference. Ultimately, the cost of waging World War II simply made it impossible for Britain to hold onto its imperial pretension.

With the Truman Doctrine, made manifest in Europe by the Marshall Plan, America was able to dominate the instruments of international trade, but perhaps surprising it took until 1996 and the birth of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) for anything like a systematic basis for world trade to come into being.

And to be fair to those who are unenthusiastic about Europe generally the one issue the Conservative championed and were able to persuade the then EEC to adopt was the single market – a project of Margaret Thatcher’s, back in the eighties, and one that she sold to the Japanese to get them to invest in the North East.

In both the creation of the EEC and in its transformation into the European Union there was the recognition of its founding principles of free movement of goods capital, labour and services held within it the potential for labour market abuse.[^15]

Consequently, the capital/labour conflict was mitigated by social policies with the Treaty of Rome, starting with equal pay.  Putting the point in a rather crude way, the EU stops a race to the bottom that member states might otherwise try to undercut one another by ditching workers’ rights relating to pay, non-discrimination and health and safety laws.  However, it would be wrong to consider that once out of the EU the UK could dump social policies in the name of competitiveness. If there is to be a deep and special relationship with the EU, then trading with the EU will be on the basis that the UK mirrors those social policies that we have taken into our laws from European law.

And of course, once the terms of trade start requiring compliance with labour and safety norms then there must be a dispute resolution mechanism built into the systems – which is how that focus of Brexiter ire, the European Court of Justice, came into being. And even the freer approach under WTO Rules requires a dispute resolution mechanism.

So perhaps, after reviewing the curious situation that the country now finds itself in, it is time to take a longer view of the present tribulations. There is, I think, little chance of new, fresh, trading options supplanting trade that will be lost with the EU. There appears to be little chance of a return to the simplicities and flexibility of the common law as it applied in past centuries. Perhaps we should be thankful that history is repeating itself as the farce of Brexit and not as the tragedy of the conflicts of the twentieth century, even though the generations that fought in those conflicts, my parents’ and grandparents’ generation, will not rest easy with how their inheritance and gift to the future has been handled.

And now remember Rheinberg, not for the siege of 1633, but for its Commonwealth war grave. There are 3334 graves at Rheinburg, mostly British but a substantial number of Canadians, Australians, and New Zealanders, plus Poles, South African and Indian internments. 3334 is, in the terms of World War Two, a statistically tiny segment of a greater tragedy. Whatever the EU’s faults the one undeniable fact of its existence has been the absence of war as means of its member states resolving conflicts. In leaving the EU we are abandoning post war political stability –for what? For buccaneering free trade, selling electric cars to Mauritius? Satisfying the hungry with cheap chlorinated chicken? To preserve a fractured and fractious political party from self-harm? Four hundred years ago the negotiators at Westphalia were able to end one of the bloodiest and costliest conflicts in European history by putting aside personal glory and political gain. Perhaps it is time to abandon myth, to do the boring sums and think beyond the narrow horizon of the nation state. Past generations had the courage to stand up for beliefs and values that we may have assumed had entered the national blood stream but now seem utopian: we can only repay our debt to that past by giving to the future the opportunities and advantage we now seem intent to squander. 

[^1]: R (Miller) v Secretary of State for exiting the European Union [2016] EWHC2768 (Admin)

[^2]: [2107] UKSC 5

[^3]: Prince Rupert is exactly that sort of dashing cavalier hero Brexiters (or even Brexiteers) could identify with: having undertaken not to fight against the Hapsburg emperor in return for his freedom, he left for England in 1641. He not only proved his worth as a cavalry general but later showed equal prowess as an admiral, cannon designer (the Rupertinoe is named after him) and producer of mezzotints, a process he claimed to have invented. His sister, Sophia, was a remarkable intellectual and patron of Leibniz, and, as mother of George I effectively the ancestor of all British Royals since. Unfortunately for the Brexiteers though the family was German: allowing foreigners in to reform the Navy and start a new and enduring dynasty is just the sort of thing that post Brexit immigration curbs should finally put a stop to.

[^4]: Neville Chamberlain may have thought that the then state of Czechoslovakia was “a faraway country” populated by “people of whom we know nothing…” but in the Middle Ages cultural exchanges between England and Bohemia were commonplace. Richard II’s queen was Anne of Bohemia: the religious dissident Jan Huss exchanged views and ideas with the early advocate of the vernacular in religious life, John Wycliffe. Wycliffe enjoyed the protection of John of Gaunt, but ultimately after Richard’s was deposed Henry IV saw religious dissent as political treason: Henry’s religious orthodoxy had been forged as a crusader not in the Holy Land but fighting pagans in the Baltic. His statute, De Heretico Comburendo introduced burning at stake for non-conformity. In England such a fate would befall Sir John Oldcastle, the model for Shakespeare’s Falstaff (Shakespeare changed the name when threatened with proceedings by Sir John’s surviving ancestors). Jan Hus, too, was burnt at the stake following the Congress of Constance, thus giving to the English language the expression “to cook ones’ goose…” “hus” being medieval Czech for goose.

[^5]: There was, indeed, another defenestration in 1493, but for reasons I have never resolved, it is referred to as the “1 ½ Defenestration”, notwithstanding it was as deadly as the first. There is also a candidate for a third (or fourth) defenestration when in 1948 Jan Masaryk fell to his death from a window of the Černin Palace. Controversy remains over whether this was suicide or murder, but as one contemporary noted “Jan Masaryk was such a tidy man he even shut the window after he jumped…”

[^6]: There were in fact to separate instruments that together formed the Treaty of Westphalia: Instrumentum Pacis Osnabrugense (IPO) and the Instumentum Pacis Monasteriense (IPM).

[^7]: Peter H. Wilson, Europe’s Tragedy, Penguin Books 2010

[^8]: For a contrary view of the Westphalia Treaty see Peter Fitzpatrick, Taking Place: Westphalia and the poetics of law, London review of International Law Vol 2 Issue 1 2014 155-165

[^9]: With the Treaty of Westphalia, the Papacy more or less bows out from secular politics. True – the Papal States remained a dominant state in the Italian peninsular, with the ability to wage war against its neighbours. Ironically though it was the 1871 fall of Rome and the creation of a united Italy that was to bring the Papacy back on to the world stage. Effective prisoners in the Vatican, Popes such as Leo XIII turned to social teaching: forsaking political power the Papacy now sought to persuade the world that man does not live by bread alone. Whilst the trappings of monarchy remained, the ideas were distinctly communitarian, in an effort to avoid the Church losing ground to Marxism. By the pontificate of Pius XI the intend audience for the Church’s social teaching was no longer to be confined to the faithful, but it was the pontificate of John Paul II that showed the Papacy could once again influence European history. Laborem Exercens transcends confessionalism and is more than ever relevant to the capital and labour question in the 21st century. In the ship yards of Gdansk Polish trade unionists were able to give an answer to Stalin’s rhetorical question to Laval: “How many divisions has the Pope got?”

[^10]: Is the European Union a re-incarnated, secularized, Holy Roman Empire? Some might say so, see for example J. Zielonka, Europe as Empire. The Nature of the enlarged European Union (Oxford 2006). Marx’s (or were they really Engel’s?) comments on the repetition of history was given credence by curious events on 11th October 1988, when the Rev Dr Ian Paisley denounced the Pope, John Paul II, as anti-Christ as he was giving a speech to the European Parliament. Fortunately for the Pope an MEP for the Bavarian CSU was at hand to eject Dr Paisley: Otto Von Habsburg, who but for the creation of the Republic of Austria would have been the Habsburg Emperor.

[^11]: Preparing for our future UK trade policy Cm 9470, October 2017.

[^12]: Needless to say, the history of Jews in the Holy Roman Empire is scarcely a happy one, only occasionally illuminated by examples of toleration. While Charles V was at the Diet of Augsburg he accepted arguments from the energetic Jewish Shtadlan, Gershon of Rosheim, not to expel Jews from the Empire and to ignore the anti-Semitism of Antonius Margarita. However, 1555 saw not only the Peace of Augsburg but a virulently anti- Semitic Pope, Paul IV, establish the Roman ghetto, the walls of which stood until Rome fell to the forces of the Risorgimento in 1871. Meanwhile, in England Cromwell allowed Jews to enter the country for the first time since their expulsion in 1290 under Edward I (the property the community had to abandon in Oxford was used to fund Balliol College). This wasn’t toleration: Cromwell believed that the conversion of the Jews was a condition precedent to the second coming, and he considered allowing the Jews into England would facilitate this. Meanwhile, back in Europe in the post 1648 world the toleration of Jewish communities had one curious side effect: groups of the more radical Protestants, rather than face expulsion, converted en masse to Judaism: the Czech surname Krawchek denotes such origins.

[^13]: At [https://www.uktradeinfo.com](https://www.uktradeinfo.com/Statistics/OverseasTradeStatistics/Pages/OTS.aspx)

[^14]: In the case of Germany see: [https://wits.worldbank.org](https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Compare/country/DEU/indicator/MPRT-TRD-L/partner/WLD/product/Total/country/ALB;AUT;AZE;BLR;BEL;BIH;BGR;HRV;TKM;CZE;EST;FRO;FRA;GEO;TJK;GRL;HUN;ITA;AND;KGZ;LVA;LTU;LUX;MKD;MDA;MNT;NLD;NOR;POL;SWE;RUS;SER;UKR;CYP;ROM;TUR;/show/line)

[^15]: Some might say more than just the potential. However, the principal of free movement is best illustrated by the famous cases of International Transport Workers Federation and Finnish Seaman’s Union v. Viking Line [2007] ECR I-0779 and Laval und Partneri v Svenska Byggnedarbetareförbundet [2007] ECR I-11767